Page 60
36
poet-persona, and the historical John Gower, Strohm argues for obvious distinctions. He
applies to the Confessio E. Talbot Donaldson’s “threefold scheme” for describing the
interplay of voices in the Canterbury Tales as Chaucer the Pilgrim, Chaucer the Poet, and
historical Chaucer.
10
By this logic, “Gower as Amans” acts as the equivalent of “Chaucer
the Pilgrim,” and “Gower the Poet,” Strohm writes, maintains a carefully drawn
“distinction between himself and his persona.”
11
This neat delineation of voice and
persona, however, proves both problematic and untenable. Finally, such a schema speaks
more to the critic’s desire for access to Gower’s unified meaning than it does to poem’s
operations.
12
Such critical investment in maintaining sharp distinctions, precisely where the
text resists such clarity, suggests the reader’s desire for interpretive control and a desire
for “truth.” Ultimately, Donaldson’s “threefold scheme” returns us again to the problem
of an autobiographical fallacy and the presumption that an author’s conscious intent can
be recovered by the masterful critic. In analogous terms, Marshall Leicester disputes
Donaldson’s schema for Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales. He claims that such a schema
reveals an underlying interpretive fantasy, but that the General Prologue “deliberately
and calculatedly denies” the reader a “sense of knowing where we are and with whom we
10
See E. T. Donaldson, “Chaucer the Pilgrim,” PMLA 69 (1954): 928-36.
11
Strohm, “A Note on Gower’s Persona,” 296.
12
In a similar vein, Elizabeth Scala notes that “while critics invest their
arguments in this distinction [between the poet and Amans], the Confessio itself
emphasizes the blurriness of any lines that could be drawn” (Absent Narratives,
Manuscript Textuality, and Literary Structure in Late Medieval England [New York:
Palgrave, 2002], 162).
Page 61
37
are dealing.”
13
In the Confessio, we are similarly denied any surety of knowing. We
cannot be sure that we are dealing in the Latin marginalia with the voice of Gower. Nor
can we can be sure where the characters, Amans and Genius begin and the poet ends.
Indeed, the Confessio stalls readers with its “multiplicity and ambivalence,” and through
its cacophony of voices, the poem explicitly articulates the challenges of guaranteeing
meaning and undermines any certain distinctions between truth and fiction.
14
The recurrent manifestation of autobiographical fallacy in the reception to the
Confessio is, I argue, one textual effect of the poem’s confessional discourse. A similar
effect occurs in Chaucer’s Legend of Good Women, where likewise the author appears as
a character within the text itself. This is not to say that autobiographical fallacies only
emerge in texts that are confessional, but, the penitential “I” produced by confession
seems to promise especially “unmediated access” to the author or speaker’s “unified,
coherent, and authentic desires.”
15
The critical desire for this access reflects of how
confession promises to deliver truth. Yet any claims to unity, coherence, and authenticity
are problematized by the Confessio. The poet’s impersonation of the lover—“quasi in
persona aliorum”—immediately registers the poem’s self-conscious fictionality. At the
same time, rather than merely writing about the lover, the poet chooses to write in the
person of the lover. Because it confuses the distinction between the fictional “I” and the
13
H. Marshall Leicester, Jr., The Disenchanted Self: Representing the Subject in
the Canterbury Tales (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1990),
386.
14
Scala, Absent Narratives, 159.
15
Patricia Clare Ingham, “Psychoanalytic Criticism,” in Chaucer: An Oxford
Guide, ed. Steve Ellis (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 466.
Page 62
38
fictional ‘other,’ the Confessio’s claims to access are fraught. Therefore, rather than
assuming that the Confessio emerges as the product of stable “self,” who exercises
complete control over the text’s multiple discourse, I contend that a theory of subjectivity
best accounts for poem’s ambivalences. Confession, whatever its promises, is inherently
inventive. Therefore, the entire poem and its multiple “subjects,” textual bodies, and
voices are produced by and through confession’s demand to speak.
By better understanding the discursive operations of the confessional mode, I
argue that we can resist the autobiographical fallacy and can avoid flattening the
Confessio’s complexity. The confessional mode creates an unstable narrative space that
straddles past and present: a space that simultaneously evokes introspection,
retrospection, and production. As a speech-act, confessional utterance resembles the “liar
paradox” in which the “I” speaking the words “I am lying” can never be the same as the
“I” being spoken.
16
Elucidating the parallels between this paradox and the medieval
sacrament of penance, Gregory Roper writes:
The penitent discovers a self by trying on another’s (the handbook’s)
language, traits, and description. But in that very moment of discovering
oneself, one sets that self aside. The penitent displaces the old “I” of his
past sins into the role of a sinner, comes to understand the significance of
his old life, and thus gains a new self.
17
Essentially, Roper describes a process that produces (rather than expresses or reveals)
medieval subjectivity: a process by which a sinner is made “subject” to the discipline and
16
Kathryn Lynch discusses the “liar’s paradox” in Chaucer’s Philosophical
Visions (Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 2000). See especially pp. 114-5.
17
Gregory Roper, “Pearl, Penitence, and the Recovery of the Self,” Chaucer
Review 28 (1993): 168.
Page 63
39
language of sacramental penance. That is, a sinner is both made a grammatical subject of
which various sinful actions may be predicated, and she is subjected to the religious law
of institutional confession and all the self-scrutiny that it demands. During the
transitional process of confession, the sinner’s “self” (in Roper’s terminology) proves to
be divided and constructed rather than unified and natural.
Yet, I argue, the confessant is not the only divided subject produced by
confessional discourse. In his psychoanalytic analysis of modern literary confession,
Denis Foster posits that confessional narrative occurs “between two substantial, unsettled
subjects.”
18
His remarks seem especially applicable to the Confessio’s enactment of a
dialogue between the “subjects,” Amans and Genius, both of whom, I argue, are upset
and “unsettled” by the confession. According to Foster, by “calling on the listeners’ need
to understand,” the confessant/speaker evokes in the listener “a sense of loss that is
experienced as a desire for truth”—that is, the confessant “can unsettle the listener’s
sense of self-possession.”
19
Foster’s analysis helps to explain how Amans’s confession
and the Confessio, as a whole, affects its readers. Justifiably, critics have observed that
the Confessio—both in the manner of rhetoric and in the manner of confession
manuals—attempts to provoke its readers to response and action.
20
By considering the
role of the listener/reader, Foster declares that “the meaning of a work cannot be found
18
Denis Foster, Confession and Complicity in Narrative (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1987), 3.
19
Ibid.
20
See, for example, William Robbins, “Romance, Exemplum, and the Subject of
the Confessio Amantis,” Studies in the Age of Chaucer 19 (1997): 180-1.
Page 64
40
within its own boundaries.”
21
Indeed, quite literally and figuratively the meaning of the
Confessio exceeds its own boundaries as the confession spills over onto the margins of
the manuscript page.
22
With its dramatic intertextuality—its repeated transgressions of
discursive, linguistic, and generic borders— the Confessio refuses to offer its readers
either closure or a stable “subject.”
II
Whereas most critics either disregard the poem’s penitential frame as irrelevant
artifice or, alternatively, treat it as enforcing the didacticism of the poem (and of “moral
Gower”), in my own analysis I extend the work of two critics, Elizabeth Scala and Peter
Nicholson, who allow for confession’s narrative function as productive rather than
didactic. Nicholson points out that the “whole framework of fictionalized moralizing has
received little attention from the commentators on the poem.”
23
One problem in
particular has been how to treat meaningfully the penitential frame together with
Genius’s exempla. Nicholson fruitfully addresses this problem by discussing how
Amans’s presence allows “Gower to shift the emphasis from purely abstract moralizing
21
Foster, Confession and Complicity, 1.
22
For recent discussion of Gower’s manuscript apparatus, see Siân Echard,
“Glossing Gower: In Latin, in English, and in absentia: The Case of Bodleian Ashmole
35” in Revisioning Gower, ed. Robert F. Yeager (Asheville, NC: Pegasus Press, 1998),
237-57; “Pre-Texts: Tables of Contents and the Reading of John Gower’s Confessio
Amantis,” Medium Aevum 66 (1997): 270-87; Robert F. Yeager, “English, Latin, and
Text as ‘Other.’
23
Peter Nicholson, “The ‘Confession’ in Gower’s Confessio Amantis,” Studia
Neophilogica 58 (1986): 193.
Page 65
41
to the difficulties of the individual sinner’s real experience.”
24
The result is a different
type of mores than that provided by Gower’s Mirour de l’Omme and the Vox
Clamantis—a “morality of human love,” which is presented obliquely and requires the
listener’s (both Amans’s and the reader’s) active engagement in order to produce
meaning. Nicholson’s reading of the frame and exempla together demonstrates the call
and response between Amans and Genius and how one subject unsettles the other’s sense
of truth. Frequently, Amans redefines Genius’s lessons to fit his own experience. This
process of redefinition, I suggest, might also be considered as type of mediation
occurring between past and present and between Amans’s fantasies and Genius’s
fantastic stories.
25
Such mediation appears central to the way confessional discourse
works to produce subjective truth and how medieval literary confession, in particular,
troubles a clear delineation between the stories of others and the story of oneself.
In the Confessio, fantasy functions to craft the poem’s “subjects,” and fantasy, we
might say, is the search for presence beyond absence.
26
Repeatedly, the poem
demonstrates the power of the imagination (ingenium) to fabricate or formulate “reality”
24
Ibid.
25
Russell Peck’s description of the interplay between Amans and Genius as a
“phenomenology of make believe” is suggestive here: “Amans will respond to Genius’s
stories with glimpses into the ways he views himself, glimpses which are quite wonderful
fantasies in themselves that are answered with Genius’s equally fantastic stories, brought
with a fresh warp from the past, as the two weave together a politics of make-believe”
(“The Phenomenology of Make Believe in Gower’s Confessio Amantis,” Studies in
Philology 91 [1994]: 258).
26
In her discussion of “sovereign fantasies,” Patricia Clare Ingham writes that
“fantasy signifies both (as often in the colloquial sense) utopian hopes for imagining a
different world and (as often in psychoanalytic use) the jouissance (enjoyment) that
surfaces through desire” (Sovereign Fantasies: Arthurian Romance and the Making of
Britain [Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2001], 7).
Page 66
42
and “truth.”
27
Genius warns in Book Five that lovers “thurgh here oghne fantasie / Thei
fallen into Jealousie.” Overcome by jealousy, lovers are like a ship that has “tobroke his
cable” and with every wind is “muable” (5.441-4). When overtaken by a covetous
paranoia, a lover turns “The lust of loves duete” into “strif” (5.488-9). A lover, feverish
with jealousy, follows his beloved everywhere with his eyes. His constant surveillance
and suspicion causes her to change her behavior: “Sche not what thing is for the beste, /
Bot liveth out of all reste; / For what as evere him liste sein, / Sche dar noght speke a
word ayein” (5.503-6). She dares not oppose her jealous lover’s paranoid fantasies;
whatever he says, she agrees with. Thus, fantasy has the capacity to alter reality. As
Genius puts it, jealousy is a “fieverous maladie / Which caused is of fantasie” (5.588-9)
and which works “Thurgh feigned enformacion” of the lover’s “ymaginacion” (5.93-4).
The lover imagines discord and, consequently, brings such discord into being. Yet,
Genius’s illustrative exemplum contradicts his moralizing. The Tale of Venus and
Vulcan describes Vulcan’s suspicion of Venus’s fidelity; but, rather than “feigned
information,” Vulcan’s jealousy proves well-founded. Nevertheless, when Vulcan asks
for reparations, the gods rebuke him. From this tale, Genius advises that if “such a happ
27
Winthrop Wetherbee writes that “Twelfth-century thought on imagination
tends to fall into two main categories”: “One…tends to consider imagination as
intimately bound up with the influence of the natural motus which activate cosmic and
human nature. Imagination expresses our impulse to realize, to possess, or to participate
in what we naturally desire and thereby give expression to the ingenium, or natural bent,
of our nature, which is ultimately orientated toward harmonious participation in the
natural order. Twelfth-century spirituality, on the other hand, tends to emphasize the
psychological process of imagining and its role in our institutions of spiritual reality, its
power to abstract from the external world images which, by their beauty, intricacy, or
variety, enable us to form a notion of the richness of the divine.” (“The Theme of
Imagination in Medieval Poetry and the Allegorical Figure ‘Genius,’” Medievalia et
Humanistica 7 [1976]: 46).
Page 67
43
of love asterte,” a lover should “feigne” as though “he wiste it noght” because if he lets it
“overpasse, / The sclaundre schal be wel the lasse” (5.707-11). Rather than suffering
slander, lover should feign ignorance instead. Genius, in effect, simultaneously
denounces and recommends “feigning,” and thus we are hard-pressed to discern his
position on fantasy. Because fantasy alters “reality” for both good and evil, the poem
constitutes the imagination as a neutral faculty that is not in itself intrinsically moral or
immoral. As such, the fantasies produced by the imagination are not so much as
categorically opposed to truth as constitutive of it.
As we see in the proliferation of Genius’s “fantastic stories” and Amans’s
fantasies, confession maintains a fine line between the disclosure of truth and the
invention of fiction. Indeed, Scala points out that “like the contradictory actions of the
institution of confession as mandated by the Church, the Confessio asks its readers to
accept and deny the powers of fiction in the very notion of moralization.”
28
The poem’s
repeated discussion of feigning registers the fine line between truth and fiction. The
poem clearly ties the author’s fiction-making to the lover/sinner’s potential feigning.
Therefore, Scala emphasizes Gower’s creation of a “distinctly literary, secular
confession” through which confession’s inherent powers of fictionalization—its “process
of production”—are put into effect, making “reader and writer complicit in the dangers
and rewards the poem offers.”
29
These reflections on confession’s “inherent powers of
fictionalization” concur with my assessment of the dovetailing of rhetoric and confession.
28
Scala, Absent Narratives, 156.
29
Ibid., 143 and 166
Page 68
44
Moreover, by stating that the Confessio offers both rewards and danger, Scala implies
that confessional discourse functions, in part, as a seduction—that it plays upon its
reader’s conscious and unconscious desires. Building upon such observations, I want to
turn now to the Tale of Mundus and Paulina. Told by Genius in order to explicate the sin
of pride—The Tale of Mudus and Paulina dramatizes in miniature the Confessio’s
concerns with confessional discourse, feigning, seduction, and secrecy. It highlights both
the rewards and dangers of confession and it showcases the inherent power of the
discourse to shape “truth” instead of merely representing it. To my knowledge the
importance of this tale—as a confession within a confession—has not previously been
explored.
III
The Tale of Mundus and Paulina appears in Book One as the only tale in the
entire Confessio that features the sacrament of confession. The tale serves as the first
exemplum of the Seven Deadly Sins—an illustration of the sin of pride and, specifically,
of hypocrisy and deceit in love. Genius defines a hypocrite as “A man which feigneth
conscience / As thogh it were al innocence / Withoute, and is noght so withinne” (1.595-
6). Amans quickly declares his innocence. He maintains that he has not been a hypocrite
because his “corage” has been even sicker than his “visage;” his interior (“withinne”) and
exterior (“withoute”) have been in harmony, and he is interiorly as low and humble as his
appearance suggests. Indeed, Amans appears to be without ego and pride, so Genius’s
illustration of a Mundus, a successful but corrupt lover who intrepidly pursues sexual
Page 69
45
satisfaction, seems hardly necessary. But, as Nicholson points out, “this is the only tale
in Book I about a man who is overcome just as Amans is, and like Amans, Mundus
typifies an essential frailty of human nature, that innate susceptibility to love.”
30
In turn,
the fiction of the poem rests upon this universally human condition—the susceptibility to
love. In the characters of Mundus (the world) and Paulina, the tale entwines the
seductions and desires of worldly love with the divine. The tale addresses innate human
“frailty” and the capacity for deceit, but it ends happily. In the end, justice is dispensed
and truth is restored.
The temple of Isis serves as a locus of institutional corruption in the Tale of
Mundus and Paulina. The temple’s two priests are drawn by Mundus into a plot of deceit
by “weie of schrifte”:
This lord [Mundus], which wolde his thonk pourchace,
To ech of hem yaf thanne a yifte,
And spak so that be weie of schrifte
He drowh hem unto his covine,
To helpe and schape how he Pauline
After his lust deceive myghte. (1.816-821)
The two corrupt priests fare badly in Genius’s telling. Mundus easily procures the
priests’ loyalty for the price of an unspecified “yifte.” The priests “here trowthes bothe
plyhte” (1.822) to aid and abet Mundus in achieving “al his entente” (1.825). The
ambiguity and irony of “trowthe” plighted to such a deceptive purpose—the seduction of
Paulina—draws explicit attention to the fine line between truth and falsity. The priests
keep their troth to Mundus’s scheme but in doing so they violate the troth/truth of their
spiritual office. Unlike in Mannyng’s Handlyng Synne, the “weie of schrifte” serves
30
Nicholson, “The ‘Confession’ in Gower’s Confessio Amantis,” 197.
Page 70
46
Mundus not as the “way of grace” but as a way of seducing Paulina and thereby obtaining
another type of grace altogether. As an unstable discursive space, confession is shown to
promote the articulation of desire and its transference between unsettled subjects.
Like the Confessio’s middle way, the “weie of schrifte” in the Tale of Mundus
and Paulina combines “lore” and “lust,” and, consequently, confessors and confessant
alike become conspirators in the dangers and rewards of desire. Mundus “spak” and
“drowh” the priests “unto his covine, / To helpe and schape how he Pauline/ After his lust
deceive myghte” (1.819-820). Through confessional speech, the priests are seduced by
Mundus; they are drawn into his desire and subsequently help “schape” his plot.
Genius’s choice of this tale even suggests the transference of desire between himself and
Amans.
31
The priests of Isis perform for Mundus precisely what Amans wishes Genius
would do for him. In this way, the lines between a confessor’s “lore” and a confessant’s
“lust” are shown to be indistinct, and it becomes hard to tell where one originates and the
other leaves off. Unsurprisingly, then, we see the priests of Isis putting their authority
and “lore” to work for the cause of Mundus’s “lust.” After Mundus learns that Paulina
cannot be swayed by gold or gifts, the priests “feignende an hevenely message” (1.834)
and, thereby, use her faith as the “mede” or bribe.
Mundus provides an example of a man whose reason has been compromised by
all-powerful love. But, likewise, Paulina is compromised by her extreme love for the
god, Anubus. Paulina “was decieved” because the priests “hadden wel conceived / that
sche was of gret holinesse” (1.830-1, my emphasis). The close proximity of “deceive”
31
As Scala points out, “Mundus’s deceit and desire [is] less a lesson of Genius’s
than a projection of Amans’s own” (Absent Narratives, 148).
Page 71
47
and “conceive,” which share the same Latin root, capere (“to take, seize, hold”), suggests
the violent (mis)appropriation of knowledge. Aware of Paulina’s susceptibility to love,
the priests flatter her:
Of him [Anubus] schalt take avisioun.
For upon thi condicioun,
The which is chaste and ful of faith,
Such pris, as he ous tolde, he leith,
That he wol stonde of thin acord. (1.845-49)
With its language of sex (“he leith,” “wol stonde”) and pregnancy (“conceived,” “thy
condicioun,”), this passage anticipates a false annunciation. The priests claim that she
will receive “avisioun” of Anubus and that the god only waits for her “acord” or consent.
Paulina’s vision, however, is distorted; the priests have reflected back to her an image
that perfectly accords with her own inner desires. Thus, Genius tells us that Paulina
“Glad was hire innocence tho / Of such wordes as sche herde” (1.852-3). Paulina’s
“innocence” cuts two ways here: on one hand, she is literally innocent enough to be
deceived by the priests’ story, but, on the other hand, her innocence is glad of or affirmed
by the words she hears. Her “oghne wille” (1.951) or desire for virtue helps accomplish
Mundus’s plot. Paulina is seduced by the longing—the “hope” of being “fulfild of alle
holiness” (1.895)—which the priests’ tale produces in her.
Although the tale is not overtly critical of classical religion or of Paulina’s
devotion to Anubus, it does present Paulina’s predicament as a parody of Christian
religion and “lore.” The fiction of Anubus’ selection of the “chaste” Paulina to be the
mother of his son who will be “himself a godd also” (1.921) and whom “al the world
schal have in mynde / The worschipe of that ilke Sone” (1.918-919) parodies the “true”
Page 72
48
story of Mary and Jesus and, thus, blurs the lines between truth and fiction.
32
The corrupt
priests of Isis make a mockery of the Annunciation, and they manipulate Paulina’s proper
yearning for union with divine into a union with “the world.”
33
Genius, however, does
not condemn Paulina by making her especially prideful at her selection by Anubus.
34
She
is humble and receives her husband’s blessings beforehand. The tale’s emphasis then is
upon the priests’ deceitful maneuverings, which defile their spiritual office and the sacred
space of the temple of Isis. Mundus’ plot is entirely taken over by the priests, who are
uncommonly eager to see the deed done. As servants of Eros, they rather than Genius are
the poem’s true priests of Venus. Nevertheless, the inevitable parallels between Genius
and priests of Isis pose a problem for the reader. Does the tale’s moralizing target the
institution of confession, the corruption of priests, or both?
32
The underlying humor in this passage was well established in medieval culture
by contemporary drama’s depiction of the comic Joseph as a cuckold figure who doubts
Mary’s virginity. See, for example, “Joseph’s Troubles about Mary” in York Mystery
Plays, ed. Richard Beadle and Pamela King (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984). Of course,
a similar joke occurs in Chaucer’s Miller Tale where an elderly carpenter is cukolded by
his young wife.
33
As a corollary, Georgiana Donavin argues that the desire of Mary for Jesus
illustrates “the human union with the divine” and the stories of virtuous women such as
Peronelle in the Tale of Three Questions show how incestuous passions can be
transformed into a proper “yearning for human salvation” (Incest Narratives and
Structures of Gower’s Confessio Amantis [Victoria, B.C.: University of Victoria, 1993],
51-63).
34
Kurt Olsson points out that “Genius has left out the boasts of her counterparts
in tradition: the Paulina of Josephus’ Antiquities (18.3.4), the foolish Madonna Lisetta da
Ca’ Quirino of Boccaccio’s Decameron (4.2), and the Olympias of Gower’s later story of
Nectanabus (6.1789-2366) all, to some degree, have an exaggerated sense of self-worth,
and they easily succumb to the blandishments of the a pretender-god or angel” (John
Gower and the Structures of Conversion: A Reading of the Confessio Amantis
[Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 1992], 74).
Page 73
49
As it should be, Mundus’s confession operates as a profession of desire, but
instead of being cleansed spiritually of his sinful lust and reformed, he profits materially
through confession’s privacy. Analogously, in Dante’s Divine Comedy, the story of
Paolo and Francesca illustrates how shared reading and the privacy of tête-à- tête
discourse can arouse desire. For this reason, the Church feared the potential intimacy that
might spring up between confessor and confessant as well as the desire that might be
produced by the explicit discussion of sin.
35
The defining feature of Mundus’s
confession to the priests of Isis is its occurrence “in prive place” (1.818), and secrecy or
“prive” comes to characterize Mundus’s entire plot throughout the tale. The scene of
Paulina’s seduction, for example, is articulated as follows:
And al withinne in prive place
A softe bedd of large space
Thei hadde mad and encourtined
Wher sche was afterward engined.
Bot sche, which al honour supposeth,
The false Prestes thanne opposeth
And axeth by what observance
Sche myhte most to the plesance
Of godd that nyhtes reule kepe. (1. 875-883, my emphasis)
The priests lay a soft trap in a “prive place” where Paulina is “engined” or entrapped.
“Engin” or “ingenium” suggests that the priests use imagination—theirs and Paulina’s—
to trap her. With artfulness, the priests craft a space wherein Paulina supposes that she
35
As Karma Lochrie, in her Foucauldian analysis of confessional secrecy, puts it,
“[c]onfession necessarily ventured this area of pleasure—of thinking about sin—through
the act of verbalization, but this pleasure is one of the secrets and paradoxes of
confessional logic” (Covert Operations: The Medieval Uses of Secrecy [Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1998], 40). See also Lochrie’s discussion of how
confession “brings the ‘risk of corruption’ to the priest in the form of pleasure in the talk
of sins” (36).
Page 74
50
will be honored rather than dishonored. But the “place” is not what it seems and neither
are the false priests.
We learn that the plot’s secrecy seems to obligate confession and vice versa. As
Paulina “opposeth” or questions the priests, we are reminded of Amans’s confession.
Genius tells Amans, “Thi schrifte to oppose and hiere / My sone, I am assigned hiere”
(1.233-4), and Genius’s speech is typically marked in the marginal apparatus as “opponit
confessor.”
36
Here Paulina acts the part of the confessor by questioning the priests. Yet
rather than discerning truth, her query furthers the plot’s dangerous “plesance.” She does
not adequately question the plausibility of the situation but instead accepts the priests’s
facade of supposed honor. In their deceitfulness, the priests of Isis make a mockery of
their own religious “rule” and violate the sacred space of the temple, where they have
been ordained “To reule and to ministre there / After the lawe which was tho” (1.808-9).
Likewise, in a perversion of confession, Paulina’s questions how she might “of godd that
nyhtes reule kepe” (1.883). Of course, the “reule” which Paulina must “kepe” is opposed
to the self-rule espoused by Genius, as the false priests involve her in actions that literally
“oppose” her “honour.” In this way and in the very terms so centrally important to the
creation of his own confession literary discourse, Genius presents confession and
deception as two different, but mutually contaminating, oppositional forms of speech.
Whereas in confession the priest opposes a sinner’s willful self-belief in order to initiate
honest self-examination and the process of relinquishing a false-identity for a true one,
deception opposes itself to the discovery of truth by masquerading as truth—one desires
36
See Scala, Absent Narratives, 146.
Page 75
51
to reveal truth while the other desires to conceal it. Karma Lochrie argues that “[i]f
confession presumes the interrogator’s will to know the sinner’s secret through
complicated protocols of decipherment and disclosure, it equally presumes the
confessant’s will to conceal at the same time that he is telling.”
37
Yet in the topsy-turvy
world of the Tale of Mundus and Paulina, the “will to conceal” belongs to the false
priests, who act as hypocritical confessors and shroud their deeds in secrecy much as they
“encourtined” the “softe bedd” upon which Paulina is, finally, ensnared. The curtains
round the bed conceal the sinful deeds that occur there, but Genius’s “lore” has the effect
of throwing open the curtains of the priests’ “prive place” to reveal openly Mundus’s
“lust.”
Ultimately, Paulina and the “ymage” of Isis carry the taint of the deception born
from Mundus’s secret confession of desire, and this taint can only be cleansed by the
openness of a sequence of public confessions that draw the tale towards a just end. After
visiting Paulina in the guise of Anubus, Mundus withdraws “prively,” but Paulina returns
home openly by the public “strete” (1.930-8). The priests’ “will to conceal,” however,
cannot counter the pleasure that Mundus takes in the telling of his deeds. When he meets
Paulina on the street, he compulsively confesses. As Lochrie says of gossip and
confession, “both ‘thrive in secret’” and “both types of discourse are irrepressible even as
they insist upon secrecy and containment.”
38
Ultimately, the secret will out, and Mundus
confronts Paulina in public with his knowledge of her privete:
37
Lochrie, Covert Operations, 36-7.
38
Lochrie, Covert Operations, 56.
Page 76
52
Bot I of his [Anubus] grace have so poursuied,
That I was mad his lietuenant:
Forthi be weie of covenant
Fro this day forth I am al thin,
And I the like to be myn,
That stant upon thin oghne wille. (1.946-951)
Mundus seems to mock Paulina’s faith and service to Anubus with his own “pursuit” of
carnal “grace,” and he seeks to make her complicit in his sin and its pleasure by evoking
Paulina’s “oghne wille.” Yet here, in contrast to the “heavenly message” delivered by the
priests, Paulina “herde his tale and bar it still” (1.952). This news—another false
annunciation—coming as it does after the sexual encounter through which she hoped to
conceive the child of Anubus, reveals a stillbirth: she “bar it still.” Her stillness also
suggests silence. Paulina does not answer Mundus, and thus she refuses his discourse of
pleasure. Instead, she returns home to her own “chambre” and bed where she weeps and
cries.
Paulina had hoped to “achieve” a divine union and conception—to be “fulfild of
alle holiness” (1.895)—but Genius tells the listener “sche hath failed, as I gesse” (1.896).
Her devotion to Isis, goddess of childbirth, bears only the fruit of bitter deception and
defilement. Paulina’s stillness illustrates how, in the end, the rampant play of will and
desire fostered by secrecy and false confession comes to naught. Where earlier Mundus,
who “all untrowthe meneth, / With blinde tales so hire ladde” (1.926-7), now suddenly
the darkness is lifted and Paulina perceives the truth; she says,
“…O derke ypocrisie,
Through whos dissimilacion
Of fals ymaginacion
I am thus wickedly deceived!
Bot that I have it aperceived
Page 77
53
I thonke unto the goddes alle;
For thogh it ones be befalle
It schal nevere eft whil that I live
And thilke avou to godd I yive. (1.957-964, my emphasis)
Paulina blames neither Mundus nor the priests of Isis but instead the “dissimilacion / Of
fals ymaginacion,” and, consequently, Russell Peck says that the tale “underscores the
point that innocence can be corrupted only by thought, not the hypocritical conniver.”
39
Genius emphasizes Paulina’s agency and, therefore, her power. Paulina’s identity is
destabilized—she loses her self-possession—when confronted or opposed by Mundus on
the street, yet having “aperceived” the truth of her rape, I offer that she transforms
innocence into experience and takes hold of (capere) herself again. She finds a lesson in
her loss, and once fooled, Paulina swears she will never be fooled again. Unlike Lucrece,
whose story echoes in hers, Paulina steers her “tale” towards a redemption found in life
rather than death.
In the end, it is Paulina who demonstrates a state of proper confessional shame
and remorse; she “wepende,” and “Hire faire face and al desteigneth / With wofull teres
of hire ye” (1.967-8). Paulina’s physical appearance signifies her interior pain, and she
does not conceal what has happened but tells her husband the “soothe of al the hole tale”
(1.981). She swoons “in hire speche ded and pale” (1.982), and her husband “uphield”
her in “hise armes faste” (1.984-5)—she is literally and metaphorically “upheld”’ by her
husband who “ofte swor his oth / That he was with hire…nothing wroth” (1.985-6). The
tale moves swiftly towards its resolution and the husband’s vengeance but not before
Paulina is “sette ferst” in “reste” (1.998). The community’s justice is then meted out by
39
Peck, “Introduction,” Confessio Amantis, Vol. 1, 32.
Page 78
54
the emperor. This public assignment of blame and responsibility again recalls the
language of confession. The emperor puts the priests “into question” (1.1015), and they
could “noght a word” of the accusation “refuse” (1.1015). Nevertheless, they try to
“excuse” (1.1016) themselves by laying the blame upon Mundus. Their “will to
conceal,” however, is answered by the common voice of the “conseil,” which decrees:
That whan men wolden vertu seke,
Men scholde it in the Prestes finde;
Here ordre is of so hyh a kinde
For thei be Duistres of the weie:
Forthi, if eny man forsueie
Thurgh hem, thei, be noght excusable. (1.125-9)
Priests are the “duistres” or “guides” of the “way,” and these false priests have led both
Mundus and Paulina “astray.” Yet important to the tale and absolutely central to the
figuration of the entire poem designed as a confession, they have, specifically, perverted
confession—the way to grace—into the means of obtaining union with “the world”
instead of the divine.
The sacrament of confession bears no truth if the priests be false; instead of a true
sacrament it becomes a treacherous paradox, an amoral space between revelation and
concealment, a treacherous “middel weie” between “lust” and “lore” both inside this tale
and beyond its narrative confines as well. The Tale of Mundus and Paulina shows the
dangers and rewards of a secret discourse that gives expression to lust. For their
perversity, the priests are condemned “So that the prive tricherie / Hid under fals
Ipocrisie / Was thanne al openliche schewed” (1.1033-35, my emphasis). Finally, the
tale’s “covert operations” are openly exposed and the community is cleansed of all
pollution, and the temple of Isis is purified:
Page 79
55
The temple of thilke horrible dede,
Thei thoghten purge, and thilke ymage,
Whos cause was the pelrinage,
Thei drowen out and als so faste
Fer into Tibre thei it caste
Where the Rivere it hath defied:
And thus the temple purified,
They have of thilke horrible Sinne,
Which of that time do therinne. (1.1038-1046)
Sin taints not only the individuals involved but the entire community and even the place
in which “therinne” the sin is done. The “ymage” of Isis thus comes to represent the
idolatry of desire and the hypocrisy of religion. The false priests are executed, Mundus is
exiled, and the “ymage,” which was the “cause” of it all, is cast in the river. Although the
tale closes with a moral about the power of love, the mental image that lingers in the
listener/reader’s mind is that toppled “ymage” of Isis, a false idol.
This lingering image has been registered critically, as when Winthrop Wetherbee
argues that Genius renders Paulina’s faith “utterly invisible” at the end and that the
desecration of the “ymage” of Isis “is a symbolic re-enactment of the rape of Paulina
herself.”
40
Throughout the entire tale, however, the brunt of Genius’s criticism is
directed not at religious faith in general, but at religious hypocrisy and hypocrites—at
those who manipulate religious rule and law to their own corrupt ends. The “ymage” of
Isis is, by the tale’s end, an empty one because the community has experienced the way
in which a symbol of transcendence might become subject to human manipulation and
perversion. The image—already desecrated by the two priests—is cast into river in order
40
Wintrhop Wetherbee, “Genius and Interpretation,” in Magister Regis: Studies
in Honor of Robert Earl Kaske, ed. Arthur Groos (New York: Fordham University Press,
1986), 254.
Page 80
56
to signify the community’s purification and renewal. Furthermore, Genius imbues
Paulina with wisdom; she desires and finds “truth,” albeit in an unexpected place. She
experiences personal growth as she is transformed from a static “idol” of desire to a
thinking subject with explicit agency: “It schal nevere eft whil that I live / And thilke
avou to godd I yive” (1.963-4). She does not lose faith or blame her god but takes
responsibility for her own actions. Therefore, rather than a reenactment of Paulina’s
rape, I argue that the toppled image of Isis, provides a suggestive counterpart to perhaps
the most memorable image in the Confessio and one that has been imaged in some
miniatures in the poem’s manuscripts: the body of John Gower as senex amans in Book
Eight.
41
IV
The Tale of Mundus and Paulina problematizes the relationship between virtue
and sin, honesty and hypocrisy, and reflects the poem’s anxiety about the paradoxical
space of confession. As Elizabeth Allen says, “Gower is often apt to create situations in
which the proximity of virtue to sin risks profound moral confusion.”
42
Amans’s
confession is just such a situation where Gower muddies rather than clarifies the “moral
waters.” The toppling of the “ymage” of Isis is penitential; it cleanses the community of
sin and puts a temporary end to “moral confusion.” The tale focuses on the recuperation
41
For a discussion of these manuscript images, see J. A. Burrow, “The Portrayal
of Amans in Confessio Amantis,” in Gower’s Confessio Amantis: Responses and
Reassessments, ed. Alastair Minnis (Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 1983).
42
Elizabeth Allen, “Gower answers Chaucer: Constance and the Trouble With
Reading,” EHL 63 (1997): 629.
Page 81
57
of “truth” by Paulina and her community, and its optimistic ending represents truth as
objective and thus publicly verifiable. Similarly, the conclusion of Confessio offers
readers a seemingly objective and demonstrable “truth”—the truth of old age. As one
body supplants another, this image of old age functions to topple the figure of Amans.
The materialization of John Gower’s aged body at the end of Book Eight attempts to
constrain the poem’s proliferation of fantasy and fiction. This body, however, is a
problematic gesture towards closure and ultimately an unsuccessful guarantor of the
poem’s meaning. As another “fiction” produced by and through the confession—the
senex amans endeavors to satisfy the desires of Amans and, likewise, the desires of the
reader. To suggest that this body is a “fiction” is not to deny its potency—that it
represents the “truth” of mortality. Rather I want to show how, as in medieval confession
manuals, a textualized body is made to speak the truth and how the figure of the body
attempts to circumscribe the pleasures of confessional speech.
As the confessional dialogue gives way to the poem endgame, Venus reappears to
assert order and control. The poem resorts to a dream vision and a “wonder mirrour,”
wherein Amans/John Gower finds represented the “truth” of his elderly self. The body
produced by this mirror has the effect of distrupting Amans’s fantasies; the lack of
pleasure that he takes in the “outwith” of his body revises his perception of himself and,
consequently, revises the reader’s interpretation of the poem. Ultimately, by asking
readers to both accept and deny the powers of fiction, the confession enacts contradictory
actions and, seemingly, these contractions seemingly can be resolved only by resorting to
the pre-discursive body and the objective truth that that body promises to confer. The
Page 82
58
body offers itself as the realization of presence that Amans and the reader have been
searching for and thus the end of the poem’s fantastic stories and Amans’s fantasies. In
this way, the lover’s aged body is central to the poem’s confession and the work it is able
to do even if only retroactively.
Many critics assume that the poem’s confession should function as the curative
for the lover’s willfully subjective behavior and his self-delusional fiction, and that
through his confession the lover should relinquish his private desires in order to pursue
the common good. Amans’s “cure,” however, is affected less by his confession itself and
more by his final prayer to Venus and her consequent mercy. Moreover, the poem’s
resolution hinges upon a deus ex machina—a mirror that reveals to “John Gower” his
elderly body and, hence, his unfitness for love. Thus, Michael Cherniss complains that
the confession “fails” to effect a transformation, and that the “manner in which Gower
finally resolves Amans’s problem seems…arbitrary and unsatisfactory—either a trick
played upon the reader or else a retreat from Gower's own articulated belief in man’s
moral responsibilities.”
43
Yet although the confession itself does not effect Amans’s
transformation, the senex amans is a product of the confession’s desire for truth. The
concluding gesture toward the body is a penitential one that attempts to stabilize the
poem’s “truth” upon what is tangible and concrete. Importantly, this unambiguous “end”
is demanded by the confessant, Amans, who struggles for something real, for a literal
presence rather than a figure of his imagination.
43
Michael Cherniss, Boethian Apocalypse: Studies in Middle English Vision
Poetry (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1987), 116.
Page 83
59
It is apparent throughout the eight books of confessional dialogue that Amans is
most interested in advice that might lead to the consummation of his desires—to his
fantasy becoming a reality and absence becoming presence. He is hungry for a taste of
his lady, but his desire is never realized. Instead, he continually must fast and “mai no
fode gete” (6.701). He has all the “woldes” and “wisshes” he could desire but they have
neither “fielinge” nor “tast” (6.924, 926). Here, Amans clearly knows the difference
between fantasy and reality and he hungers after tangible satisfaction. He wants
something that he can literally feel and touch. In the end, however, Amans confronts the
“reality” of a less desirable body than his lady’s. By denying pleasure or “lust,” John
Gower’s aged form promises an embodiment of truth. In seeming contrast to the moment
in which the poet-persona takes on the role of the lover (“as if in the person of”), the
appearance of the senex amans in the mirror claims to be a moment in which pretense and
fiction are relinquished for reality. Yet, I suggest, this supposed “revelation” merely
prompts another textual impersonation. This time the poet takes on the role of a lover
constrained by age.
The existence of the mirror in which John Gower sees himself as an old man
suggests that truth is objective, and that perhaps the truth of the lover’s age has always
resided in the text.
44
This “fact” of old age comes as an abrupt realization. After eight
books of disembodied confessional discourse in which the lover’s “real” body has not
figured at all, the Lover’s and the reader’s sudden confrontation with the body is a
summed up in a mere ten lines:
44
Indeed, this is Donald Schueler’s argument in “The Age of the Lover in
Gower’s Confessio Amantis,” Medium Aevum 36 (1967): 152-8
Page 84
60
Wherinne anon myn hertes yhe
I caste, and sih my colour fade,
Myn yhen dymme and al unglade,
my chiekes thinne, and al my face
with Elde I myhte se deface.
So riveled and so wo besein,
That ther was nothing full ne plein,
I syh also myn heres hore.
My will was tho te se no more
Outwith, for ther was no pleasance. (8.2825-33)
The portrait of the Lover’s agedness emerges grammatically through verbs of negation:
his color fades, his eyes dim, his cheeks thin, and his features are tainted “with Elde.” As
we read, the lover ages right before our eyes, illustrating how “Gower addresses Truth by
exploring False.”
45
The adjectives (“riveled,” “ne plein,” and “hore”) and verbs (“fade,”
“dymme,” “thinne,” and “deface”) tell us what the lover is at the same time they tell us
what he is not—what he has lost Hence, the figure of old age or the senex amans
functions to disrupt and distort the poem’s narrative, and, opposed by this body, both
John Gower and the reader are made to confront the fiction and fantasy of what has
preceded this end.
The latter half of Book Eight in many ways suggests a return to the “real” world.
Beginning with Amans’s direct epistolary complaint to Venus on his own behalf and the
subsequent unmasking of Amans as John Gower, the confessional dialogue is abandoned
for the poem’s end game. John Gower regains his narratorial voice and beneath a tree, he
supplicates himself before Venus and prays for her grace. He says,
Sche caste hire chiere upon my face,
And as it were halvinge a game
Sche axeth me what is mi name.
45
Peck, “Phenomenology of Make Believe,” 256.
Page 85
61
“Ma dame,” I seide, “John Gower.” (8.2315-21)
This scene recalls the beginning of Book One and the prelude to the lover’s confession,
where, in the month of May in “the wode amiddes” (1.112), the love-sick Amans prays to
Venus for some pity on his “maladie” (1.128). Yet it is important to bear in mind that
this naturalistic setting is entirely a literary convention of Courtly Love and, thus, when
the lover emerges from the confession and finds himself back “under a tre,” he has
merely moved from one fiction to another. Moreover, the fiction of Amans, which was
so explicitly assumed in Book One is not so easily discarded, and the poem’s ending
collapses rather than clarifies the distinction between the characters of Amans and John
Gower, and between the poet-persona and historical poet. As part poet-persona and part
Amans, the senex amans figure seems to mediate this distinction.
Nevertheless, the naturalness of John Gower’s old body is asserted by the poem
and taken for granted by many critics. The body’s presence negates the lover’s prior
desires and functions to recall John Gower to the natural realm of human limitation. As
Venus prepares to “sett” the lover “for a final ende,” a Latin epigram likewise prepares
the reader:
Non estates opus gelidis hirsuta capillis,
Cum calor abcessit, equiperabit hiems;
Sicut habet Mayus non dat natura Decembri,
Nec poterit compar floribus esse lutum;
Sic neque decrepita senium iuvenile voluptas
Floret in obsequium, quod Venus ipsa petit.
Conveniens igitur foret, vt quos cana senectus
Attigit, vlterius corpora casta colant.
(8. 2377)
[Winter, hairy with icy locks, is not equal to summer’s work, when its heat
has receded. Nature does not give to December just as May has, nor can
Page 86
62
clay compare to flowers; and thus old men’s lust does not flower in
youthful compliance, as Venus herself demands. It would be appropriate,
therefore, for those whom white old age touches henceforth to cultivate
chaste bodies.]
46
In this metaphorical garden of life, those who are old are advised “corpora casta
colant”—to “cultivate chaste bodies.” Finally, then, both John Gower and the reader are
called to “tend” to the body’s purity. Age is a final and inevitable constraint to acting
upon one’s desire, and Amans’s confessed struggle for love has been “against Nature”
(8.2339)—against the rule of the body. He is, therefore, advised by Venus to remember
that he is old and is recalled back to his body from the world of imaginative fantasy. As
he “clepe[s]” or calls his “wittes” “hom ayein” (8.2861-2), he relinquishes “unwise
fantasie” (8.2866) and is made “sobre and hol ynowh” (8.2879). The striving for love
that has defined his persona throughout is relinquished and Love’s constraint is replaced
with the reality of the body’s constraint. And, ultimately, I would argue, this body
attempts to contain not only the lover’s inappropriate and excess desires but the poem’s
confessional fictions. This belief, however, that he has been made whole by the
confession is a bigger lie or fiction than his improper fantasies of love.
Through his use of inner vision—his “hertes yhe”—John Gower demonstrates the
amendment of his sense of sight, and with, this insight, he finds he takes no pleasure in
his body, which is wrinkled and “so wo besein”—it is “nothing full ne plein.” The
Oxford English Dictionary gives one definition of “plein” as “smooth, even; free from
roughness or unevenness of surface” and, thus, a lack of smoothness is yet another sign
46
Translation by Andrew Galloway in Peck, ed., Confessio Amantis, Vol. 1, 256.
Page 87
63
of the lover’s haggard countenance.
47
Yet Gower uses the adjective “plein” seventy-three
times in the Confessio and about fifty-five of these uses are in the context of telling the
“plein” truth and, therefore, are meant as “open, clear to the senses or mind; evident,
manifest, obvious; easily distinguishable or recognizable.”
48
Thus, I would suggest that
the use of “plein” here contradicts the obviousness of the lover’s appearance; his face or
body is nothing “full” and not “plein.” Rather than being fixed and transparent, the
lover’s body conveys an excess of meaning and demands to be read as an “unsettled”
text. Although Venus declares this body as natural and presents its features as
incontrovertible evidence of “truth,” there is the suggestion that this body is more than it
seems.
Amans’s metamorphosis into “John Gower” is not the recuperation of the lover’s
“natural self” and “natural body” so much as it is the substitution of one fiction for
another—a fiction that attempts to clarify the moral confusion of the confession. And, as
Allen explains, “Amans’ frustration with Genius’s failure to establish a coherent set of
rules about love conduct (or, for that matter, about social conduct of any sort) mirrors our
own, if the scholarly struggles to define what happens at the end of the Confessio is any
indication.”
49
Throughout his confession, Amans wants exempla that “apply directly to
himself” and that “offer a pointed didactic message;” he wants to know unequivocally
47
Oxford English Dictionary, 2
nd
ed. 1989, s.v. “plain,” (a.and adv.); 2(a):
“Smooth, even; free from roughness or unevenness of surface.”
48
Ibid., s.v. “plain,” (a.and adv.); 4: “Open, clear to the senses or mind; evident,
manifest, obvious; easily distinguishable or recognizable.” See J. D. Pickles and J. L.
Dawson, eds., A Concordance to John Gower’s Confessio Amantis (Woodbridge,
Suffolk: D. S. Brewer, 1987).
49
Allen, “Gower Answers Chaucer,” 640.
Page 88
64
“What is my beste, as for an ende” (8.2059). Critics have displayed versions of this
desire as well. Ultimately, the “end” which Amans confronts is the same “end” that
every human must face. As a penitential reminder of death, the figure of the senex amans
opposes both the lover’s and the reader’s self-possession. In the face of this loss of self-
possession, John Gower and the reader both cling to the body as a “fixed,” “final,”
“clear,” and “unarguable image.”
50
Yet the repeated association of the body with
nature’s cycle of death and renewal reminds us that the body is not static. This body, so
obviously ravaged by the passing of time, is a tricky guarantor of the poem’s final
meaning.
In an almost complete disavowal of this body, Amans’s confession focuses
explicitly upon the sinner’s subjective experience and the “interior” workings his mind—
his thoughts and motivations for acting as he does. In Book Five, as I previously
discussed, we learn about the power of the lover’s imagination to shape reality; “thrugh
feigned enformacion of his ymaginacion” (5.593-4) the paranoid and jealous lover turns
love into distrust and affects “reality” by influencing his lady’s behavior. Yet the obverse
is true as well, because images exterior to the body (seen, heard, and read) impress
themselves upon the imagination. Using philosophy to describe the Confessio’s
epistemology, Peck argues that “[i]f there is such thing as a medieval poetic, it is
intrinsically bound up in their theories of perception and the relative interiority of
representation.”
51
When the John Gower perceives in the mirror that he is old, he revises
50
Andrea Schutz, “Absent and Present Images: Mirrors and Mirroring in John
Gower’s Confessio Amantis,” Chaucer Review 34 (1999): 109.
51
Peck, “Phenomenology of Make Believe,” 253.
Page 89
65
his sense of self and the appearance of his body through his “hertes yhe”: a spiritual
rather than physical vision. This vision posits a complex and mutually authenticating
relationship between the interior and exterior of the body. Moreover, I want to suggest,
this body is meant to be read not as “truth” itself but as truer—still a lie but a closer
approximation to the truth than what preceded it. There are, after all, many mirrors in the
Confessio, and none of them reveals “truth” with absolute clarity; Genius has warned
“The mirour scheweth in his kinde / As he hadded the world withinne, / And is in soth
nothing therinne,” (3.1076-8) because mirrors, like the imagination, can produce an
illusory reflection.
52
This body is not, then, the authoritative presence of the poet
renouncing fiction entirely or even “a retreat from Gower's own articulated belief in
man’s moral responsibilities.” Instead, like the penitential “bedis blake” (8.2959) given
to John Gower by Venus, the body promises some small degree of “repose” amidst the
world’s instability and moral confusion.
V
Scholarly response to the Confessio’s conclusion and the surprise appearance of
the senex amans registers frustration and outright disgruntlement. This climatic
revelation of the lover’s age and his unfitness for love is made all the more dramatic by
52
See Peck’s footnote to this text in Confessio Amantis, Vol. 2, ed. Russell Peck,
(Kalamazoo: Medieval Institute Publications, 2000), 365. And Schutz acknowledges that
although in “classical sources, the mirror tends to reflect the truth of the matter…[f]or the
Middle Ages the metaphor is complicated by the addition of biblical and patristic usage
which holds that a mirror reflects what should be (or actually is not) as well as what is”
(“Absent and Present Images,”109). Consequently, the mirror can be a manifestation of
desire: a desire for what should be.
Page 90
66
Gower’s use of the confessional mode, and Kurt Olsson observes that it is the nature of
confession’s disputation, “that we, like one of the interlocutors in the fiction, may
undergo shocks of recognition.”
53
Yet while the Lover describes experiencing something
akin to acceptance and recognition as he looks into the mirror, the reader experiences
only the shock of misrecognition. Unlike the fictional lover who consoles himself by
drawing into his remembrance “olde daies passed” (8.2835), the reader experiences the
alienation of unknowing.
Exemplifying the reader’s desire to restore his sense of interpretive control and
surety of knowing, Donald Schueler writes that “the agedness of the Lover is expressed
explicitly and implicitly throughout the Confessio Amantis, not just at its conclusion.”
54
With this claim Schueler suggests that the “truth” of the lover’s body has always resided
in the text, and he uses that body to assert the continuity of Gower’s “real” identity with
his fictitious one:
All of the passages quoted point to the fact that the narrator is no longer
‘freisshe’ and ‘lusti’. If they are said in passing, and if they are never
followed by the Lover’s direct admission of his own advanced age, it is
because Gower, with good reason, was aware that his contemporary
audience would identify the Lover’s age with him own, just as they would
identify the Lover’s ‘moral’ tone of voice at the beginning of the work
with Gower’s customary literary voice.
55
Schueler’s argument in many ways echoes the lover’s reaction to the mirror and John
Gower’s recuperation and revising of the “self” to correspond with “the fact” of the body:
“A wonder Mirour forto holde, / In which sche [Venus] bad me to beholde / And taken
53
Olsson, John Gower and the Structures of Conversion, 228.
54
Schueler, “The Age of the Lover,” 152.
55
Ibid., 154-5.
Page 91
67
hiede of that I syhe” (8.2821-3). The critical moves, made by Schueler, reflect his need
to ground the poem’s many voices and contradictory propositions in both the author’s
“real” body and his poetic corpus. His argument functions to restore authoritative truth
and presence to the poem. J.A. Burrow offers a different version of critical
disenchantment, when he asserts that “if the poet does not actually cheat” by making the
lover old “he comes very near cheating.”
56
Whereas Schuler’s interpretation emphasizes
a continuity of meaning, Burrow registers discontinuity; the game that Gower plays has
established rules and he breaks those rules much to Burrow’s personal disappointment.
The poet, however, first changes his poetic “rule” or style at the outset of Book One.
Moreover, he intends to speak of love which is “noght so strange” (1.10) and “which
there can noman him reule / For loves lawe is out of reule” (1.17-18). Because no man
can rule love, the poet implies that, likewise, his poem will inevitably transgress its own
boundaries.
Despite this apparent lawlessness of love and the poet’s acquiescence to it, Genius
introduces Amans to the seven deadly sins as rules to live and love by. Therefore, when
scholars discuss the Confessio in terms of “rules” (regardless of whether the poem is
embracing or rejecting them) their readings are typically a product of the poem’s
penitential frame.
57
But the “way” of confession, as we saw in the Tale of Mundus and
56
Burrow, “The Portrayal of Amans,” 14.
57
Anne Middleton says that as “public poetry” the Confessio’s voice “frequently
strain[s] against the formal frameworks that it adopted from earlier didactic genres”
(“The Idea of Public Poetry in the Reign of Richard II,” Speculum 53 [1978]: 94-114; rpt.
in Medieval English Poetry, ed. Stephanie Trigg [London: Longman, 1993], 25). In
contrast, Meecham-Jones argues that “the schema of Seven Deadly Sins” acts to
guarantee “the moral orthodoxy of the poem” (“The Poet as Subject,” 19).
Page 92
68
Paulina, is itself a transgressive and ungovernable means to producing truth and meaning
discursively. Thus, at the end of that tale, Genius advises Amans, “men scholde noght /
To lihtly lieve al that thei hiere” (1.1062-3). This warning seems especially poignant
coming as it does after a tale of priestly deception and confessional betrayal; the poem
implies that all voices—even authoritative ones such as Genius’s—are not to be trusted.
Thus, we recall Genius’s explication of the sense of hearing and his stories of
enchantment: The Tale of Ulysses and the Tale of Aspidis. Genius’s focus in the Tale of
Ulysses is to reveal or disrupt the enchantment of the Sirens, which are “monstres” of a
“wonder kynde” (1.484-5), luring unsuspecting sailors to their deaths through beautiful
“visage” and “wommanysshe vois” that is “[l]ik to the melodie of hevene” (1.494-5).
Olsson accurately surmises that Genius is “most concerned with the ‘reality’ beneath
appearance” and, moreover, that the real threat posed by the Sirens “does not lie in what
is perceived, or the seeming ‘melodie of hevene,’ but in the perception itself, including
the imagination and recreation whereby the lover makes the song appear heavenly.”
58
For his part, Genius champions the wisdom and governance of Ulysses, who devises a
solution to the problem and stops up the ears of his crew so that “his Ere for no lust to
caste” (1.521)—the men’s ears are kept from “casting” for lust. Genius would have
Amans govern himself and his ears in the manner of Ulysses, but he also commands
Amans to listen:
Whereof, my sone, in remembrance
Thou myht ensample taken hiere
As I have told, and what thou hiere
Be wel war, and yif no credence,
58
Olsson, John Gower and the Structures of Conversion, 66.
Page 93
69
Bot if thou se more evidence.
(1.530-4)
The rhyme riche of “heire” and “hiere” [here and hear] draws attention to Genius’s tale-
telling—his own words of enchantment whereby vice may be confused with virtue and
truth with falsity.
Although Amans is continually being told to be wary of hypocrisy and false
appearances, he is never told how he might discern the difference between truth and
fiction. The confession systematically compromises the distinctions between fantasy and
reality, and, from the beginning, it is represented as a fantastic enterprise—a “wonder
hap” (1.67). The confession does not take place within a dream vision per se, but Olsson
reminds us of the more figurative and philosophical reach of the genre’s applicability to
Gower’s poem when he writes that “the lover though ‘awake,’ does not know he lives in
a dream.”
59
Even if we accept that Genius’s purpose is to rouse Amans’ from this
“waking dream,” we would do well to remember that Genius, like Ulysses, is an
enchanter.
60
Perhaps Genius “is never entirely an evil charmer who lures Amans, a good
man, from faith and grace,” as the two priests of Isis lead Paulina astray, but he would
steer Amans through a perilous path of “lust” and narrative pleasure.
61
And, indeed, we
might see such passage through enchantment as the very subject of the Confessio.
59
Ibid., 47. Moreover, Kathryn Lynch places Gower’s Confessio Amantis in the
high medieval dream vision tradition. See The High Medieval Dream Vision (Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1988).
60
As Scala points outs, Ulysses is “traditionally a deceiver, a maker of fictions,
the very essence of ‘faiterye’” and “his inconstant language was responsible for the fall of
Troy” (Absent Narratives, 166).
61
Olsson, John Gower and the Structures of Conversion, 68.
Page 94
70
Both lover and reader alike are led by Genius through this passage of
enchantment, but what kind of “guide” is Genius? Much is made of Genius’s
“limitations” as a confessor—his divided loyalties to Venus and the priesthood. As a
priest of Venus, Genius is a “subject” who does not originate or fully control his position.
Instead, he is a subject of literature, a site through which the various forces of courtly
love, moral didacticism, politics and ethics intersect and often awkwardly co-exist. Yet
within his subject positions as both priest and devotee of Venus, he can assert his will and
agency. Therefore, just prior to the confession proper, Genius expresses his intention to
depart from his “common use” and to improvise:
Of Venus, whos condicioun
I moste folwe, as I am holde.
For I with love am al withholde,
So that the lasse I am to wyte,
Thogh I ne conne bot a lyte
Of othre thinges that ben wise:
I am noght tawht in such a wise;
For it is noght my comun us
To speke of vices and vertus,
Bot al of love and of his lore,
For Venus bokes of nomore
Me techen nowther text ne glose.
Bot for als moche as I suppose
I sit a prest to be wel thewed,
And schame it is if he be lewed,
Of my Presthode after the forme
I wol thi shrifte so enforme. (1.260-76)
Genius clearly identifies himself as subject to Venus: he “moste” follow as he is “holde”
and “withholde” her. Genius’s learning and experience is limited by what Venus has
allowed; he speaks only of love because Venus “bokes” or records in books “of nomore.”
Both what Genius knows and who he is evolve from books such as the Roman de la Rose.
Page 95
71
Yet Genius takes his identity as “priest” seriously and his conscience (or perhaps his
pride) seems to demand that he “enforme” Amans’s “shrifte” with instruction on the
vices and virtues. None of this leads us to expect mastery on the part of Genius as
confessor; he seems no more the guarantor of the confession’s meaning any more than
Amans does. Thus, Genius is neither consistent nor stable but an “unsettled” subject
whose self-possession is challenged by the process of confession. Furthermore, as the
confessor, Genius does not occupy a position of objectivity outside the discourse, but
is—like Amans—a product of the confession’s fictionalizing. In this way, it is possible
to explore how Amans and Genius are both enchanters (producers of fiction) and
enchantments (products of fiction).
At the beginning of Book One, when Venus asks Amans “What are thou, Sone?”
she does not ask who he is, but what he is—her question seeks a condition rather than
name. Having cast off his authorial identity, John Gower does not adopt the guise of a
specific personage but, instead, a set of passions proper to lovers. Whereas, the name
“John Gower” has acquired meaning (including the epithet “moral”) through the sum of
his life’s work, Amans is a blank slate yet to be inscribed. Amans is, in his own words, a
“Caitif” to love. As such a slave to love, he is clearly a subjected being. When the
confession gets underway, Amans asks Genius to his “shrifte oppose / From point to
point” so that “nothing be left behinde” (1.225-7). Clearly, Amans fears that he will be
forgetful, but in truth Amans has neither a past nor a present except that which is
invented by way of the confession. At the end of the Confessio when John Gower is
revealed to be an old man, it is taken as proof that Amans had forgotten himself as in
Page 96
72
keeping with the Boethian tradition of consolatio, but such a notion of forgetting suggests
that there is an essential self that can be faithfully known and returned to.
62
Such is
Peck’s position when he argues that “confession is remembering:” “Memory provides the
key to Amans’ restoration. It is the means of reclaiming his forgotten, natural self in
order that he may be released from its fantastic substitute.”
63
At the beginning of Book
One, however, the “subject” of Amans has yet to be produced by the confession.
Therefore, rather than having forgot, we might say that he literally does not yet know
who or what he is.
The question of who and what Amans is troubles the confession from beginning
to end, and at the very end, Genius claims to understand Amans, saying, “I have wel herd
and understonde, / Mi, sone, al that thou hast me seid” (8.2067-8). Genius advises
Amans to “withdraw” from love and turn to the law of reason. But Amans disputes
Genius’s understanding saying, “Mi wo to you is bot a game, / That fielen noght of that I
fiele” (8.2152-3). Amans emphasizes the isolation and self-absorption of his subjective
experience. Throughout, Amans has tried to understand Genius’s stories in order to
obtain his goal. For Amans, possessing his Lady—an idealized and transcendent object
of desire—would be akin to finally possessing “truth”; she promises to satisfy his lack by
ending his division and estrangement. Amans’s attempt at wooing his lady matches the
confession as a narrative of seduction and desire, and Genius’s desire for truth, as enacted
62
See Nicholson, “The ‘Confession’ in Gower’s Confessio Amantis,” and Peck,
“Introduction,” Confessio Amantis, ed. Russell Peck, (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1980).
63
Peck, “Introduction,” Confessio Amantis, xvi.
Page 97
73
by confessional dialogue, parallels Amans’s lust for his lady. Similarly, like the
confessor, the reader of a confessional narrative becomes thoroughly complicit in the
pursuit of, and desire for, Amans’s truth and, by extension, the truth of the poem.
Mid-point through Book Eight, the confessional dialogue gives way to Amans’s
narration and direct address to the reader. In this way, the reader’s potential role as
“confessor” becomes apparent. Yet readers are also persuaded to perform their own self-
evaluation and interpretation. Many scholars thus argue that the Confessio evokes reader-
response participation—that by drawing the reader into the poem’s fictions, the poem
seduces the reader to pursue their own “truth.” According to Peck, “Gower conjures old
tales as [a] means of wooing an audience towards confessional re-assessment.”
64
Likewise, William Robbins claims that “Gower is not primarily concerned to represent
the subjectivity of a character but rather to provoke the subjectivity of the reader.”
65
Recalling that confessional discourse unfolds within a relationship and that one does not
confess without the presence of a partner, we find that the reader supplies Aman’s with a
virtual partner. As partner in poem’s confession, the reader is called upon to respond.
Thus, Foster argues, we can read confession as “a mode by which people enter into the
discourse of their culture, where they step beyond reiteration of stories and into
interpretation.”
66
Rather than “incidental narrative” within the institutions of religion and
fiction, confession provides an important technique of fictive production and a medium
of interpretation. More than binding Genius’s tales together, the confession supplies the
64
Peck, “Introduction,” Confessio Amantis, Vol. 1, 6.
65
Robbins, “Romance, Exemplum, and the Subject,” 180-1.
66
Foster, Confession and Complicity, 7.
Page 98
74
mode by which Genius, John Gower, and the reader “step beyond reiteration of stories
and into interpretation.” We see, for example, how John Gower becomes at the end both
author and reader of his text. John Gower craves Genius’s absolution and receives it, but
he tells us that Genius “woldne nought abide” and be either his “lief” or his “loth” and,
thus, he “was left with outen helpe” (8.1948-51). Therefore, he vows his “entente” to
“[u]ppon the point that y am schryve / I thenke bidde whil y live” (8.2968-70). He
promises to pray upon “the point” and to continue the process of confessional
interpretation while he lives. The existence of the Confessio offers the evidence of the
poet’s continued confessional meditation.
The confession does not provide a pre-given set of rules and determinants by
which to read the poem. Instead, confessional discourse functions to produce the poem
and all its multiple subjects, not just the “moral” ones. Memory is, indeed, key to
confession, but it does not function to restore the past or a previous natural self so much
as it remakes and reinterprets some new “matiere” (P.6). Instead of erecting a static idol
of a final truth, I argue that the image of aged body holds out an unstable reminder of
life’s transience: a reminder of the impossibility of possessing the unequivocal “truth” of
one’s self. The image of the body inspires the poet’s initial revision and remembering,
but, ultimately, he finds his text—his corpus—upon which he promises to pray
continually. The Confessio, however, proffers an equally elusive and problematic body.
Even as the poem makes a “feigned acceptance of the stability and efficacy of
authoritative truth,” its material and textual composition compulsively proliferates voice
Page 99
75
and meaning.
67
The figure of Genius, as feigned authority, offers one example, and
others include the poem’s Latin academic apparatus (hexameter headings, speaker tags,
and glosses) and the presence of the poet’s body. Nevertheless, the Confessio self-
consciously prefaces and performs concerns about narrative reliability and instability, and
“while on many levels appearing to stand for truth and order, the poem partakes of the
world’s inevitable disorder.”
68
Yet the poem never promised and certainly never delivers
unified meaning or truth. It does, however leave the reader with the open-ended
hermeneutic challenge of taking the way, “That of the lasse or of the more” (P.20),
between lust and lore. Because the Confessio explicitly articulates the challenges of
guaranteeing meaning, the lover’s confession is not a hermeneutically sealed narrative
providing the reader with unambiguous closure and meaning, but a space of proliferating
fantasies, desires, bodies, and subjectivities.
Whereas, the Confessio emphasizes the inventional capacity of confessional
speech, in the next chapter I turn to Chaucer’s Legend of Good Women and its
dramatization of penitential performance. Chaucer and Gower were friends, and Gower
was writing the Confessio at the same time that Chaucer was writing his Legend.
69
John
Fisher notes that around 1385 “in the Confessio Amantis and in the Legend of Good
67
Patricia Batchelor, “Feigned Truth and Exemplary Method in the Confessio
Amantis,” in Re-Visioning Gower, ed. Robert F. Yeager (Asheville, NC: Pegasus Press,
1998), 15.
68
Diane Watt, Amoral Gower (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2003), xviii.
69
As Robert Worth Frank puts it, Gower and Chaucer were “doing exactly the
same thing at almost precisely the same moment” (“The Legend of Good Women: Some
Implications,” rpt. in Chaucer’s Dream Visions and Shorter Poems, ed. William A.
Quinn [New York: Garland Publishing, 1999], 306).
Page 100
76
Women, Gower and Chaucer returned to parallel love visions used as frames for
collections of stories.”
70
Fisher further observes that Gower’s “impulse for treating the
conventions of courtly love in a religious context in Confessio Amantis” appears related
to the “overt religious coloring of the Legend of Good Women.”
71
Nevertheless, despite
such observed similarities, critics have to a great extent overlooked how in both poem’s
confessional discourse produces storytelling rather than merely frames it.
In both the Confessio and the Legend, confession functions as a privileged
discourse for the production of truth, and, in turn, the confessional subject’s need or
desire for truth generates textualized bodies. In the Confessio, the senex amans serves as
the final fictive body engendered by the poem’s confession. Paradoxically, this body—
which is also a text—attempts to circumscribe the pleasures of narrative and satisfy
desire by offering the pretense of an extra-discursive reality. This self-denying,
penitential body of the senex amans anticipates my discussion of penitential satisfaction
and sacrificial desire in the following chapter. Unlike the Confessio Amantis, Chaucer’s
Legend has never before been read systematically as a literary penance. Indeed, whereas
confession seems an appropriate subject for “moral Gower” to undertake, the “religious
coloring” of the Legend produces varying degrees of anxiety in its readers. Yet perhaps
such anxiety is a textual effect of a poem that is in a way all about the agony of the
critical condition, all about the lacking and desiring of “truth.”
70
John H. Fisher, John Gower: Moral Philosopher and Friend of Chaucer
(London: Methuen and Co. Ltd., 1965), 208.
71
Ibid., 235.
Page 101
77
Chapter Three
A Shimmering Mirage: The Performance of Penitence
in Chaucer's Legend of Good Women
In criticism, the Legend of Good Women has been dealt with differently (and
perhaps more appreciatively) than has the Confessio Amantis, and consequently the
poem’s “religious coloring” often has been read as ironic and superficial. Yet rather than
merely topical, penance in the Legend, as in the Confessio, structures the poet’s
relationship to the God of Love and informs the poem’s discourse of truth and “entente.
Reading the Legend in penitential terms explains much of the poem’s anomalies, and, I
will argue, explains why criticism on the poem repeatedly invokes a vocabulary of
intention.
Chaucer’s Legend of Good Women has frequently been implicated in a debate
about authorial intention, in particular whether or not Chaucer intends the Legend to be
read ironically and, thus, whether or not his praise of “good women” is sincere or
insincere.
1
Such a debate is hardly surprising given the terms set forth by the poem itself.
1
For summary and analysis of the poem’s irony, see, for example, Elaine Tuttle
Hansen, “Irony and the Antifeminist Narrator in Chaucer’s Legend of Good Women,”
JEGP 82 (1983): 11-31 and Catherine Sanok “Reading Hagiographically: The Legend of
Good Women and its Feminine Audience,” Exemplaria 13 (2001): 323-54. The
vocabulary of Chaucer’s intent appears, most obviously, in the sustained critical debate
over the poem’s relationship to the medieval antifeminist tradition via its participation in
the querelle des femmes. Tuttle Hansen identifies John Lydgate as “the earliest reader to
record his belief that the Legend of Good Women does not offer straightforward praise of
women”—that Chaucer intends the poem to be read ironically. And in spite of
“continued arguments against ironic readings,” Tuttle Hansen observes that the notion of
Chaucer’s irony persists (“Irony and the Antifeminist Narrator,” 12).
Page 102
78
In the Prologue, the poet’s dream vision becomes a nightmare of accusation and
interrogation in which his “entente” is questioned. The poet encounters the wrathful
judgment of the God of Love and, finally, is accused of heresy. Perceiving himself thus
betrayed, the God of Love demands recompense: “If that thou lyve, thou shalt repenten
this / So cruelly that it shal wel be sene!” (F.339-40).
2
Love’s wrath is tempered,
however, by the timely intervention of Alceste, who proposes that the poet acted in
ignorance rather than malice—without ill intent. Nevertheless, the Prologue culminates
in the assignment of a penance as the poet is ordered to make “yer by yere” a “glorious
legende / Of goode wymmen” (F.481-4, G.471-4). Hence, the God of Love’s desire for
visible (as it “shal wel be sene”) repentance is met by the poem itself. In this way, the
Legend as penance promises to resolve the Prologue’s crisis of “entente” by offering the
God of Love, as evidence of the poet’s interior feelings, his professed innocence,
sincerity, and orthodoxy. With a view towards more fully explaining the Legend’s
engagement with issues of intention and representation, I will argue that penitential
discourse informs and organizes the entire poem. Because the poet’s penitential
performance directly affects his treatment of good women, I will offer an approach that
facilitates our reading of the Prologue and legends together. Penance, neither incidental
2
In the F version of the Prologue, the poet never wakes from his dream-vision,
and, thus, both his reading and writing of good women occur within the dream. In
contrast, the last two lines of the G version are as follows: “And with that word, of slep I
gan awake, / And ryght thus on my Legende gan I make” (G.544-5). All quotations from
Chaucer’s works are taken from the Riverside Chaucer, gen. ed. Larry D. Benson
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987) and are noted parenthetically. In most citations of the
Prologue, I quote from the F version and where possible give the corresponding line
numbers in the G version.
Page 103
79
nor simply a false surface under which lies an ironic truth, determines the very terms with
which we debate the poem’s (and Chaucer’s) intended meaning.
A beginning rather than an end in itself, the Prologue introduces the Legend as the
poet’s literary, penitential performance. In reading the poem as a penance, I explicitly
undertake what has been implied by many critics of the poem.
3
The Legend’s
indebtedness to a medieval discourse of repentance yields important insight into the
poem’s sacrificial and recuperative desires and into the desires of contemporary criticism.
The legends are so marked by the spectacle of female suffering—suicide, rape, violence,
and abandonment—that we need to ask why this suffering features prominently within
the poet’s penitential writing. As an act of penance, the Legend establishes a particularly
fraught relationship between the poet and the female martyrs who are the subjects of his
telling. Rather than asking if the poet (or Chaucer) intends his audience to read the
legends as true or false, sincere or ironic, and how we might know the difference, we
should instead ask what the poet’s knowledge of good women does for him and what it
does to the textualized bodies of the women he claims to rescue. I would contend that the
sacrifice of female martyrs imbues the poet’s performance with a certain pathos, which
3
Rita Copeland, for example, argues that the poet wrote the Legend “under
orders from a higher authority, to rectify the moral error of his earlier works” (Rhetoric,
Hermeneutics, and Translation in the Middle Ages [Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1991], 187). Similarly, Florence Percival defines the poem as a “palinode” and
characterizes this classical convention as a recantation “performed in atonement for the
“sin of writing ill of women,” (Chaucer’s Legendary Good Women [Cambridge: D.S.
Brewer, 1998], 155), and Peter Allen likewise labels the poem a palinode, which “is an
author’s literary confession of sins and declaration of a desire to change” (“Reading
Chaucer’s Good Women,” Chaucer Review 21 [1987]: 425).
Page 104
80
demonstrates that his heart is in the right place.
4
Thus, we can see these women as
martyred for the poet’s cause as well as the cause of love. Indeed, they function to
mediate and represent the poet’s “penitence” and help facilitate his recuperation from the
loss and division caused by sin. The women of the Legend embody pain and loss and in
so doing facilitate the poet’s recovery of a stable self. When read in this way, we might
see the Legend as a text that “unconsciously acknowledges the affective responsibility
(and thus power) that women…bear for sacrificial men.”
5
The poem’s gender strategies
then emerge as compensatory gestures of a poet who suffers from lack.
As a heterogeneous tale collection unified around the theme of “goode
wymmen…that weren trewe in lovyng al hire lyves” (F.484-5, G.474-5), the Legend
often provokes incredulity among readers who chafe at its expressed moral and the poet’s
seeming obsequiousness—his subjection to authority. Yet, the poet’s adoption of a
4
Analogously, R. Barton Palmer (“Chaucer’s Legend of Good Women: The
Narrator’s Tale,” in New Readings of Chaucer’s Poetry, ed. Robert Benson and Susan
Ridyard [Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 2003]) reads the Legend as a “penitential fiction” that
chronicles the “efforts of a harassed and troubled performing self” (191, 194). He
concludes that the legends are as much, if not more, about “the character of the accused
and harried male” than they are about “the character of the female saints” (183, 193). In
particular, Palmer observes the similarities between Guillaume de Machaut’s Lai de plour
and the Legend. He argues the following: “The ‘I’ in the Lai de plour is fictionally
feminine, but the reader is encouraged to penetrate beneath this female voice to hear and
judge how sincere and repentant the male author is. Thus Machaut shifts the traditional
rhetoric of such a text, making readers attend less to its affecting expression of emotion
and more to its performance, to the efforts of a poet aiming to achieve a particular effect”
(190). Palmer finds that the “effect” of the Legend is slightly different than that of the
Lai de plour because the “I” of the poet is displaced by the voice of the narrator. I
disagree, holding that, in both Machaut and Chaucer, the reader “is encouraged to
penetrate beneath” the Legend’s narrative and the female voices contained within in order
to “judge how sincere and repentant the male author is” (190).
5
Patricia Clare Ingham, “Psychoanalytic Criticism,” in Chaucer: An Oxford
Guide, ed. Steve Ellis (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 472.
Page 105
81
submissive penitential posture initiates a process by which he will recover his self-
mastery. In the last two lines of the F Prologue, the poet says “with that word my bokes
gan I take, / And ryght thus on my Legende gan I make” (F.578-9). The poet translates
classical “bokes” into vernacular, hagiographic “legende,” and as a penance, the poem
engages this translation on a level that is simultaneously personal and public. The stories
of good women function to translate the ineffable—the poet’s feelings—into material
evidence. “Translation,” according to Rita Copeland, “is always, in one way or another,
an act of appropriation,” and through the workings of a penitential ideology that
combines proof with punishment, the poet demonstrates his proper feeling by
appropriating both the stories and the pain of women.
6
The losses incurred by the
Legend’s victimized women suggest the ways in which gender difference can be pressed
into service “for the psychic mastery of the (male) subject” and, therefore, we find that
the poet’s penitential writing serves to masculinize rather than emasculate him.
Tropes of authorial intention and sincerity pervade scholarship on the Legend and
augment the popular interpretation of the poem as satire or comedy. More than claiming
to tell us what Chaucer really meant, the “satiric approach” frequently speculates about
how Chaucer feels, and how he feels about women especially. This, I would suggest, is a
masterful and masculine approach to the poem and one which mirrors the male poet-
narrator’s own masterful appropriation of female emotion.
7
Furthermore, satiric readings
6
Copeland, Rhetoric, Hermeneutics, and Translation, 186.
7
This combination of feeling and masculinity may seem counterintuitive given
that typically “feelings” are understood to feminize, but Marjorie Curry Woods’ work on
the rhetorical writing exercises completed by schoolboys in the medieval classroom
suggests that writing about women and as women is a masculine/masterful act. Such
Page 106
82
of the poem assume that penance serves as a constraint upon the poet’s “true” desire. In
order to problematize such critical assumptions, in this chapter, I turn more emphatically
to the insights of psychoanalysis. Approaching the poem in this way, the poet’s penance
emerges not as a constraint upon the poet’s desire but as strategy of it. The Legend
underscores the poet’s desire not only to rescue and redeem “good women” but also his
desire to regain a state of innocence and be redeemed himself. As L. O. Aranye
Frandenburg points out, “[f]rom the standpoint of psychoanalysis, the distinction between
self-rescue and the rescue of the other is impossible to sustain absolutely” and, moreover,
“[t]he subject wants to redress the lack it fears in the other, and wants to redress the lack
it fears in itself.”
8
In the Legend, the poet employs penance as his particular mode of
self-rescue.
9
The way in which both the Prologue and the legends conflate the poet’s
writing did not feminize the boys (as feminist theory might suggest) but instead further
masculinizes them. As Woods puts it, “rather than encouraging an understanding of and
empathy with ‘real’ women, such nostalgic feelings may have furthered male bonding
and gender differentiation among adults” (“Boys Will be Women: Musings on Classroom
Nostalgia and the Chaucerian Audience(s),” in Speaking Images: Essays in Honor of V.A.
Kolve [Asheville, NC: Pegasus Press, 2001], 146).
8
L. O. Aranye Fradenburg, Sacrifice Your Love: Psychoanalysis, Historicism,
Chaucer (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2002), 29. In her recent analysis
of the Legend, Fradenburg reads the poet’s (self)rescue not, as I do, in terms of
penitential discourse but in terms of chivalric discourse. She concludes that the poet
succeeds (or at least he believes that he has succeeded) in redeeming good women: “The
Legend of Good Women fantasizes that good women, despite their suffering, have really
been rescued, worthy of their textual resurrection because of their capacity for sacrifice”
(Sacrifice Your Love, 196). In contrast, I take a less optimistic view of the poet’s
condition and argue that he fails to rescue either himself or the women and he knows that
he fails.
9
For Fradenburg such self-rescue is an ethical discourse, which “proposes to
repair the fault in man’s being through acts of (self)rescue (‘subjectivation’) in which
‘one is called upon to take oneself as an object of knowledge and a field of action, so as
to transform, correct, and purify oneself, and find salvation’” (Sacrifice Your Love, 177).
Page 107
83
“trouthe” with the “trouthe” of women evinces the impossibility of sustaining any
distinction between self-rescue and the rescue of the other.
In exploring the theological and thus psychological implications of the poem’s
use of repentance, I emphasize the “efforts of a harassed and troubled performing self.”
10
There emerges a marked difference between the Prologue and Chaucer’s previous dream
visions, where his poets partake in dream-events with a degree of passivity and critical
detachment. In the House of Fame, for instance, the poet-dreamer observes from a
distance the supplicants to the goddess Fama, and in The Book of the Duchess, the poet’s
dream focuses upon the Black Knight’s grief rather than his own hinted at love-sickness.
However, in The Legend of Good Women, the God of Love’s caustic taunting draws the
poet from his role as observer to become a main actor in the dream’s unfolding drama. In
the Legend, the poet “takes himself as an object of knowledge and a field of action.”
11
Conceived as a character, the poet becomes his own subject as he performs penitence.
Ostensibly, the Prologue debates the “truth of womanhood,” but quickly any distinction
between the “truth” of women and the poet’s own truthfulness is collapsed—the debate
over the poet’s “entente” displaces the debate over the faithfulness or faithlessness of
women. Significantly, we find this same displacement in criticism of the Legend. The
question is rarely whether or not the legends succeed in vindicating women, but rather
does Chaucer intend for the tales to succeed or fail? Therefore, critics have often
dismissed the poet’s stated intentions and endeavored instead to recover Chaucer’s “true”
10
Palmer, “The Narrator’s Tale,” 194.
11
Fradenburg, Sacrifice Your Love, 177.
Page 108
84
meaning. The Legend thus encodes a secret truth that is only revealed through masterful
critical reading. In this way, the parallels between the interpretive priorities of the critic
(including my own) and that of the medieval confessor emerge more sharply.
Both critic and confessor occupy the position of interrogator, whose “will to know
the sinner’s [or poet’s] secret through complicated protocols of decipherment and
disclosure…equally presumes the confessant’s will to conceal at the same time he is
telling.”
12
The presumption of concealment is most evident in, although certainly not
limited to, ironic or comic readings of the poem. Recently, Catherine Sanok has explored
the implications of reading the Legend ironically; she argues that a satiric approach has
the effect of disregarding any alternative and, particularly, “irony-proof” traditions
provided by the poem’s association with hagiography. Sanok explains that the “reception
of the Legend as a satire has been shaped by the hermeneutic priorities of medieval
antifeminism”:
13
The reading of poem as satire, which has prevailed in the last twenty
years, often relies on the idea of two audiences, a female audience duped
by the poem, perhaps even flattered by its central conceit, and a more
sophisticated (male) audience whose greater access to the literary
traditions on which Chaucer draws gives them privileged insight into the
poem’s “real” meaning.
14
This critical discussion surely points to the over-determined role of gender in the poem,
but also to the issue of interpretative power or control—who is in “the know” and who is
being duped. The object of the poem’s satire has been variously identified as women, the
12
Karma Lochrie, Covert Operations: The Medieval Uses of Secrecy
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1998), 36-7.
13
Sanok, “Reading Hagiographically,” 347.
14
Ibid., 330-1.
Page 109
85
God of Love or Cupid, the poet, as well as the antifeminist tradition itself.
15
All such
arguments point to the Chaucer’s authorial control as the originator of the poem’s irony.
16
Just as in the Confessio Amantis, the Legend’s penitential discourse produces a fictional
“I” that makes especially strong claims for access to an authoring and authorizing
presence who stands outside the poem and guarantees its meaning. Yet by treating irony
as an inevitable structural consequence of the Legend’s penitential poetic, we might avoid
the limitations of such an autobiographical fallacy and fantasy.
The particulars of poetic-making are aligned in the Legend with the language of
medieval repentance. Unlike Gower’s emphasis upon confessional speech and dialogue
in the Confessio Amantis, Chaucer’s Legend emphasizes the recuperative operations of
penance. Hence, the poem develops what I call a “penitential poetic.” This term makes
clear the mutually delimiting registers of poetry and penitence. The poem deploys a
paradigm of truth-making that—in imitation of the manuals defining penance like the
Parson’s Tale— is simultaneously retrospective, introspective, and productive. Through
this process of poetic truth-making, the penitential poet tries faithfully to represent
himself to his audience. The poem addresses the critical issue of representation: the
representation of the subject to itself and to others. In this respect, I agree with Kellie
15
See, for example, Tuttle Hansen, “Irony and the Antifeminist Narrator.”
16
Whether sincere or ironic, most readings suggest that Chaucer consciously
renders his poetic “entente” and that this “entente” can be recovered by the critic. The
insights offered by psychoanalysis, however, suggest otherwise. In an introduction to
such a psychoanalytic critique of Chaucer that works especially well in terms of the
Legend’s narrating persona (as it also does for the persona of Amans in Gower’s
Confessio), Ingham explains that the first-person pronoun—the ‘I’—“silently claims a
fiction that it can never deliver: to give us unmediated access to Chaucer’s unified,
coherent, and authentic desires” (“Psychoanalytic Criticism,” 466).
Page 110
86
Robertson, who examines the Prologue’s “procedures of self justification”; she proposes
that Chaucer’s appointment, during the late 1380s, to the commission of the peace in
Kent informs the Prologue’s preoccupation with judgment, identity, and intention: “The
forensic work of the peace commission demanded that laborers narrate their work in an
unambivalent and legible fashion; if this narration was unconvincing, laborers were
branded as recalcitrant or ‘rebellious.’”
17
Yet Robertson suggests that “Chaucer’s self
imagining…goes beyond mere autobiographical referentiality”:
[T]his experience [on the commission] provided a matrix for a dilation on
a number of social and ethical questions which Chaucer found most
pressing: the relative values of truth and falsity; the dangers attendant on
poetic work as vernacular “makyng”; the problem of justifying one’s labor
before various forms of authority.
18
Chaucer’s interest in truth, falsity, and “unambivalent” self-justification is certainly
relevant to his juridical activity as Robertson claims, but the problems of self-
representation and the suspicions caused by the gap between intention and action (or
contrition and satisfaction) are even more manifest when one approaches the poem from
the penitential angle.
Ironic readings of the poem are produced when we read the poet’s (at times
Chaucer’s) “real” intentions or desires as subversive. However, psychoanalysis critique
of the unified “self” suggests that Chaucer’s “entente” cannot be recovered by the critic.
Applying such an understanding to poem, I seek to shift our interpretive paradigm and
avoid the current critical impasse wherein the poem is read as either ironic or sincere.
17
Kellie Robertson, “Laboring in the God of Love’s Garden: Chaucer’s Prologue
to the Legend of Good Women,” Studies in the Age of Chaucer 24 (2002): 126.
