  MANDEVILLE'S TRAVELS AND THE ANGLO-FRENCH MOMENT
For over a quarter of a century Isabelle of France, Edward II's widow, played
little or no part in public life. After her prominent role in the politics of the
late 1320s, and her notorious liaison with Roger Mortimer, summarily executed
for treason in 1330, she lived in semi-retirement at Castle Rising in Norfolk
and, latterly, at Hertford Castle. In the final year of her Ufe, however, she came
back into her own. The event that provided her with a last opportunity to play
a major part on the historical stage was the arrival in England in May 1357 of
the King of France and other French nobles captured at the Battle of Poitiers in
1356. The queen's household accounts, largely overlooked by historians, record
many distinguished visitors to Hertford Castle, two pilgrimages to Canterbury,
banquets in London, and a participation in the Garter celebrations at Windsor.'
For this winter queen, Christmas 1357 was special. From November she was
exchanging letters and gifts with King Jean, and several French noblemen visited
her at Hertford. A few days before Christmas there arrived, from a more local
source, a brace of deer for her kitchen. The man who brought the deer was
named John MandeviUe.^
For six hundred years readers have reflected on the autobiographical passages
in Mandeville's Travels.-^ The author presents himself as an EngUsh knight and
pilgrim, born and raised in St Albans, who left his homeland in 1322 and returned
from his adventures thirty-five years later, composing his account of his travels,
according to difFerent versions of the texts, in either 1356 or 1357. Over the
years scholars have sought to identify the author with one of a number of
John MandeviUes Uving in fourteenth-century England. In the 1930s Josephine
Bennett undertook a thorough examination of the evidence, and many issues
remain where she left them at the time of pubUcation fifty years ago."* This new
reference from Queen IsabeUe's accounts, hitherto unremarked, represents an
intriguing addition to the corpus of material she assembled. It seems almost to
represent a missing piece of her jigsaw.
     The strong authorial statement in Mandeville's Travels continues to impress
some scholars as a sign of authenticity.* Yet the work provides Utde original
information about the places allegedly visited, and it is clear that however
well travelled the author may have been, he wrote his account from books not
memory. For many scholars the 'I, John MandeviUe ...' is merely part of the
fiction. It is not the case, though, that aU that the author says about himself and
                                 MEDIUM ^ V U M                             LXXV.2
his work can be regarded as false. The claim to have written the work in the
late 1350s is consistent with the dadng of the main sources and the manuscript
tradition. The Travels seemingly makes extensive use of French translations of
Latin travel narradves anthologized by Jean le Long, a monk of Saint-Berdn at
Saint-Omer in 13 51.' Conversely, a date of composidon later than 13 60 is scarcely
compadble with the richness and variety of the manuscript tradidon evident
by the 1370s.' The earliest extant dated manuscript was made for Charles V of
France in Paris in 1371.' By this dme there were three French versions of the
 Travels in existence, associated variously with the Ile-de-France, England, and
Liege. In the early 1380s there were transladons into Ladn and English, and
in the 1390S two independent transladons into German. By the beginning of
the fifteenth century the work was also available in Italian, Spanish, German,
Dutch, and Czech.'
    The origin of this medieval best-seUer remains uncertain. It was written in
French, but there is real doubt as to the interreladon and priority of the three
French versions. The author's self-idendficadon, a number of textual references,
and the survival of a large and important family of manuscripts in Anglo-French
would tend to give the palm to England.'" On the other hand, some of the
earliest and most presdgious texts — notably the royal manuscript of 1371 — were
produced in Paris and written in the French of the Ile-de-France. The claims of
Liege likewise have to be acknowledged. In the last decades of the fourteenth
century it was the centre for the diffusion of a third French version, when stories
began to circulate that Mandeville had setded in Liege and worked as a physician
under an assumed name. Over the last hundred years scholarly opinion as to
the author's nadonality has shifted back and forth between England, France,
and Belgium, though in a manner largely devoid of nadonalist pardsanship. In
the early twendeth century Paul Hamelius' bold claim that the author of the
Travels was Jean d'Outremeuse, canon of Liege, won support in England but
failed to impress his fellow Belgians." It was Josephine Bennett, an American
scholar, who did most to keep England in the frame, demonstradng that the
Liege version derived from the version current in Paris in 1371, and arguing that
the Parisian version was inferior to the Anglo-French.'^ Bennett's findings were
challenged by de Poerck, a Belgian philologist,'^ and most scholarly opinion
condnued to favour condnental authorship. A growing appreciation of the
sources used by 'Mandeville' has dpped the balance further towards France. M.
C. Seymour, the leading Mandeville scholar in England, claims that the Travels
was written in a major monasdc library in northern France." Chrisdane Deluz,
his French counterpart, remains committed to the view that 'Mandeville' was
an Englishman who combined travel with reading.'^
    The earliest readers of Mandeville's Travels, whether insular or condnental, did
not doubt that the author was English. The largest group of Anglo-French texts,
and a number of the Liege texts, include a Ladn dedicadon to Edward III.""
The earliest extratextual references appear in English chronicles. The Meaux
chronicle includes a reference to Mandeville, his travels, and his dedicadon of
his book to Edward III, immediately following the account of the Batde of
        MANDEVILLE'S TRAVELS AND THE ANGLO-FRENCH MOMENT                           275
Poiders in 1356." Thomas Walsingham, monk of St Albans, included Sir John
MandeviUe, pilgrim, in a list of benefactors of the abbey compiled some dme
before 1394.'* Although neither chronicle says anything more than can be found
in the Travels, Mandeville's associadon with St Albans was well accepted. A list
of jewels, ornaments, and other treasures compiled around 1400 records a gold
ring given to the abbey by the knight-pilgrim." A copy of a letter purportedly
written by 'John Mandeville, pilgrim' attesdng the gift of a relic to the shrine of
St Thomas at Canterbury indicates wider acceptance of his historical idendty
as an Englishman.'^" In other respects England made curiously Utde of its best-
known writer. In the 1480s John Rous of Warwick described MandeviUe as a
doctor of medicine, presumably reflecdng the Liege tradidon.^' In the 1530s
John Leiand, who included Mandeville in his dicdonary of Bridsh writers, had
Utde informadon to go on. He did recaU, though, being told as a child that the
author of the Travels Uved at 'HainviUe', where Sir Thomas Lovell had recendy
buUt a great house.^^ There may have been some memorial to MandeviUe at St
Albans prior to the Dissoludon, but the one described in the seventeenth century
was acknowledged to be more recent.^^
   Far from celebradng its major claim to Uterary fame, England aUowed the
cult of MandeviUe to go offshore. In the late fourteenth century it became
increasingly associated with Liege and its celebrated physician Jean de
Bourgogne, aUas Jean a la Barbe. In successive local redacdons of the Travels
MandeviUe was presented as meedng the physician in Egypt, and then as being
persuaded by him to setde in Liege and to write up his adventures. In Ly Myreur
des histors, compiled in the 1390s, Jean d'Outremeuse, canon of Liege, revealed
to the world, purportedly on the basis of the physician's deathbed confession
in 1372, that Jean de Bourgogne was none other than an English knight named
MandeviUe, who had left the realm under a cloud, travelled the world, and
thenfinaUysetded in Liege.^''Jean de Rivo (d. 1403) included in his chronicle a
nodce of Mandeville, his idendty with the physician, and his death and burial
in Liege.^' In the course of the fifteenth century his house and his tomb in the
convent of the hermits of St WiUiam were shown to visitors.^' In 1462 Jakob
Puterich von Reichertshausen visited the site and noted down a Ladn epitaph.^'
Even in England, the idendty between MandeviUe and the celebrated physician,
and Liege's status as MandeviUe's adopted home and final resdng place, seem
to have won acceptance.
   The bizarre story of the knight-physician had a long run, but is now generaUy
discredited. It remains conceivable that Jean de Bourgogne was the author of the
Travels, and invented MandeviUe in the manner in which Swift invented Gulliver.
In this scenario Jean d'Outremeuse may have spun a web of untruth around a
kernel of fact. For it is clear that the canon of Liege — the sole witness to the
physician's deathbed reveladon - was shameless in his mendacity.^* HameUus'
thesis that Jean d'Outremeuse himself was the author of the Travels is less
plausible. He was a mere youth in the 1350s, and the incorporadon of the
Liege material into the Travels — with which he was almost certainly associated
— took place in a number of stages through the 1370s and i38os.^' Scholars
276                                M E D I U M ^EVUM                        LXXV.Z
have been a little reluctant to excise Liege entirely from the story of the origins
of Mandeville's Travels. Deluz still entertains the possibility of an English
author ending his days in Liege.-"* J. R. S. Phillips has suggested that Jean le
Bel, chronicler and canon of the cathedral of Saint-Lambert (d. 1370), would
be a more plausible Liegeois candidate than either Jean de Bourgogne or Jean
d'Outremeuse.-"
    Although there is no tradidon associating Mandeville's Travels with anywhere
other than England and Liege, there is a strong body of scholarly opinion
that the work was written in northern France. T h e earliest dated manuscript
was produced in Paris in 1371, and other related manuscripts indicate that the
text was well established in the Ile-de-France by the late 1360s. As Bennett
demonstrated, the Parisian text, or something like it, formed the basis for the
Liege family of manuscripts. Her case that the Parisian version was 'a poor
copy of a redaction', and that the Anglo-French version 'represent[s] most
faithfully the work of the author', was contested by de Poerck, who showed
that the earliest manuscripts of both versions exhibited high levels of textual
corruption.'^ More recently M. C. Seymour has broadened the case for French
provenance by reference to the library required for the composition of the
Travels. 'MandeviUe' drew on a wide range of relatively rare books, including an
anthology of travel literature translated into French around 1351 by Jean le Long,
monk of Saint-Bertin at Saint-Omer. O n the assumption that such books were
more likely to be found in a monastery in France than in England, Seymour has
concluded that the author of the Travels was a French monk or cleric, someone
not unlike Jean le Long himself.^' According to this view, the author's English
idendty was endrely ficdonal. O n Europe's western rim, England may have
seemed as good a place as anywhere to start an imaginary travel adventure, and
'Mandeville' may have been a play on 'Mandevie', the name of the hero of a
sadrical French romance of the 1340s.'''
    Though widely accepted in the English-speaking -world, the case for a French
origin is less robust than at first might appear. Seymour has probably overstated
Mandeville's dependence on monasdc libraries. Though Mandeville shows some
familiarity with his Ladn authorides, he appears to have generally worked with
French transladons and abridgements.'' It is the availability of works like Jean
le Long's anthology that becomes the crucial issue. It should not be assumed
that such a work could only have been available in a monastic library, Jean le
Long wrote with a more worldly audience in mind, and presumably some copies
of his work found their way into the book coUecdons of princes and nobles.
In the circumstances of the 1350s such collecdons were almost as likely to be
English as French. Saint-Omer was barely twenty miles from Calais. Though it
remained a French stronghold, the countryside around was subject to regular
occupadon and pillage, notably in major chevaucheesm 1351 and 1355. Books were
valuable prizes of war, and in dmes of truce peace-offerings. The presence of
Edward III in Calais in 1350 and 1355 and the longer-term residence of Henry
of Grosmont, Duke of Lancaster, in the early 1350s brought opportunides for
cultural exchange.'' Equally, if copies of the work found their way westwards
        MANDEVILLE'S TRAVELS AND THE ANGLO-FRENCH MOMENT                          277
to Paris and the French royal court, a copy may almost as readily have passed
into English hands. The Duke of Lancaster spent the winter of 1352-3 in Pads,
where he was royally entertained and plied with gifts." At the Batde of Poiders
in 1356 the prizes included books, including King Jean's sumptuous Bible.''
    The textual case for French authorship of the Travels is even less compeUing
than the argument from sources. The model of textual transmission implied
by a French provenance is counter-intuidve and uneconomical. Given the
presdge of Parisian French, the logic of the substandal reworking, including a
dghtening up of the narradve and changes in word order, implied by the Anglo-
French version is far from clear. This scenario also involves, in litde more than
a decade, a redacdon into Anglo-French and then a number of transladons
from Anglo-French into English. It is easier to imagine in the same period an
Anglo-French original being made over by a French scribe. Bennett's assessment
of the reladve literary merits of the condnental and insular versions likewise
needs to be taken into account. The Parisian version is looser and more prolix,
and includes interpoladons of dubious relevance." In the light of de Poerck's
cridque, she was rash to claim that the Anglo-French version was in all respects
superior. But de Poerck's posidon was essendaUy agnosdc: in view of the levels
of textual corrupdon in both versions, he believed that it was impossible to
determine which one was closer to the archetype. His inclinadon towards a
condnental origin - simply because the French manuscripts were earlier - was
quite perverse. De Poerck was comparing French texts produced in the best
scriptoria in Pads in 1371 with Anglo-French texts copied around 1400. He might
have asked why the Parisian texts should show such textual corrupdon, unless
the scribes were dealing with originals whose orthography, syntax, and cadence
presented challenges. Equally, he might have marvelled a litde more at the fact
that English scribes, making copies in milieux in which French was increasingly
alien, frequendy preserved 'la bonne legon'.'"' Significandy in her recent, brief
review of the three versions, Deluz found decidedly in favour of the priority
of the Anglo-French version.'"
    The Anglo-French version of Mandeville's Travels is certainly several decades
older than the texts de Poerk used in his study. The manuscript tradidon, as
evidenced by generadons of textual differendadon and several transladons into
English, must date back to around 1370, at the latest.''^ Though not quite as
prolific as the French version, the Anglo-French version is represented in at
least twenty-five manuscripts.'" It was clearly influendal. It features in a number
of condnental manuscripts, including ones dated 1402 and 1410.'''' Conversely,
the only copies of the French version extant in England are late imports.'" It is
true that none of the twenty-five copies of the Anglo-French Travels is as early
as the Parisian text of 1371. Yet an addidonal, albeit incomplete Anglo-French
text sold at Sotheby's in 1987 has been dated on palaeographical grounds to
the mid-fourteenth century.'" The manuscript, comprising some forty folios
of the Travels, is now in private ownership and not available to scholars, but
an examinadon of the photograph in the catalogue reveals a hand that looks
decidedly earlier than 1370 and wholly warrants the cataloguer's claim that it
278                               MEDIUM ^ v u M                              LXXV.Z
appears to be 'the earliest witness to the text'."" This manuscript, datable within a
few years of the composidon of the Travels, significandy increases the likelihood
that the work was originally written in Anglo-French.
In seeking to elucidate the milieu within which Mandeville's Travels was written,
there is every reason to look more closely at England in the late 1350s. The
reference to a man named John Mandeville provides a useful new focus. The
date itself is at the very least a striking coincidence. The author of the Travels
claimed that he wrote his work in 1356, according to the Anglo-French version,
or in 1357, according to the Parisian version. The John Mandeville who called
on Queen Isabelle at Hertford Casde resided in the very district in which the
author claimed to have been born and bred. He is idendfied as the parker of
Enfield, a part of Enfield Chase, one of the most celebrated hundng reserves
in south-east England."*^ St Albans lay about twelve miles - an hour's ride on
horseback — from both Hertford and Enfield. Even for an armchair traveller,
it was a small world.
    In her quest for the author of the 7rai'e/.r, Josephine Bennett focused attendon
on Mandevilles setded in the area around St Albans, especially a group of manors
in Essex, Hertfordshire, and Middlesex known as the honour of Mandeville,
the core of the Mandeville earldom of Essex in the twelfth century. The main
Mandeville line came to an end in 1227, when the lands and dde passed to the
Bohuns, but cadet lines survived in a number of places. The most notable were
the Mandevilles of Black Nodey in Essex. At least two members of this line were
knighted in the fourteenth century: both were called Thomas and were retainers
of the Bohuns, earls of Hereford and Essex. A pardcular focus of interest was a
John Mandeville, presumably a scion of this line, who received a gift of 20 marks
in the will of Humphrey Bohun, the sixth earl, in 1361.'" With their principal
seat at Pleshey in Essex, the Bohuns had a number of lordships and manors in
the district, including Enfield. Bennett also noted Leland's recoUecdon that the
author of Mandeville's Travels Uved at 'HainviUa', and suggested, among a number
of possibiUdes, that the place might be Enfield.^"
    The new reference from Queen IsabeUe's household accounts aUows the
fragments to be pieced together. The John MandeviUe who came to her at
Hertford Casde in 1357 presumably belonged to a local family. It is perfecdy
conceivable that he was born and educated at St Albans. His oflfice as parker
of Enfield indicates that he was Uterate and in the service of Humphrey
Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, the lord of the manor of Enfield. He can
reasonably be idendfied with John Mandeville, the earl's esquire and legatee in
1361. Though he was not a knight, he probably belonged to a knighdy family
and may have seen military service. The parkership was a post of honour as
well as profit, and the handsome legacy of 20 marks suggests that he was held
in high regard. It was presumably this man whom Leland's informant recaUed,
one and half centuries later, as the author of the Travels. There is no doubt that
'HainviUa' was Leland's Ladnizadon of Enfield.'' LoveU's grand house at Enfield
— built on the rewards of service to Henry VII — was one of the wonders of
         MANDEVILLE'S TRAVELS AND THE A N G L O - F R E N C H MOMENT             279
early Tudor England.^^
    This John Mandeville was no monk, though he may have benefited from
an educadon in the cloister and had access to a monasdc library. In view of
the significance of sources in French transladon, what may have been more
important is his access to the books and inspiradon found in aristocradc
households. The Bohun connecdon seems especiaUy relevant. The Bohuns, earls
of Hereford and Essex and constables of England, were one of the oldest and
most disdnguished noble Uneages." Humphrey, the fourth earl, was a comrade-
in-arms of Edward I and married one of his daughters. A leader of the baronial
opposidon to Edward II, he died a traitor's death at Boroughbridge in 1322. He
was evidendy a culdvated man. His interest in French romance is suggested by
the naming of his son Eneas after the Trojan founder of Britain or the hero of
the Chevalier au Cjgne''* and by a Bohun manuscript of Lancelot de Lac from this
dme." More interesdngly, his inventory includes, along with jewels and service
books, the Liure que est apelee Sydrak, the earUest known copy of this work in
England. A book of knowledge, presented in dialogue form and in the framework
of romandc ficdon, it addressed broadly simUar interests to Mandeville's Travels!'''
Briefly imprisoned after 1322, the fourth earl's sons had their lands restored, but
for the most part they eschewed public life. Pleading incapacity, John, the fifth
earl, resigned the constableship of England, though he was fit enough to go as
a pilgrim to St James of Compostela.^' Humphrey, the sixth earl, may have been
a genuine invalid. He did not marry, and he setded the constableship on his
younger brother WilUam, Earl of Northampton.'* Humphrey was succeeded in
1361 by his nephew and namesake. The seventh earl was the dedicatee of John
Erghum's Ladn commentary on the Prophecies of John of BHdlingtonP He was a
diplomat and a crusader. At his death in 1373, the Bohun inheritance passed to
two daughters who married respecdvely Thomas of Woodstock, Edward Ill's
youngest son, and Henry of BoUngbroke, the future Henry IV.
    Humphrey Bohun, the sixth earl, was a remarkable man. He seems not to
have strayed far from his casde at Pleshey or his newly crenellated house at
Enfield that soon acquired the name of 'Camelot'.™ During his dme Pleshey
developed as an important centre of cultural patronage. The sixth earl has been
tradidonaUy credited with the estabUshment of a workshop of scribes and ardsts
responsible for the producdon of a remarkable series of handsomely iUuminated
psalters.*"' While many of the extant psalters now appear to be later,*"^ there can
be no doubt that the scriptorium was estabUshed in his dme.*"' The sixth earl
was a man who seems to have culdvated the inner Ufe. He was remembered as
a generous patron of the Augusdnian order, paying half the costs of the provin-
cial synod at York in 1361.'^'* He presumably read French romance, and owned a
copy of William of Palerne. Indeed he encouraged the producdon of an EngUsh
version of it 'for them that know no French', and the poet responsible for this
early alUteradve romance described him as 'that good lord ... the hende [noble,
gracious] earl of Hereford'.**' In aU UkeUhood he was the 'good earl of Hereford'
who, according to a fifteenth-century source, 'was holden a noble surgeon'.'^'^ It
is probable too that Erghum's commentary on BridUngton's prophecies, though
                                  MEDIUM ^ V U M                                LXXV.2
dedicated to his nephew, reflects the sixth earl's interests.*"' His sponsorship of an
acdve scriptorium, his commissioning of the transladon of a French romance,
and his apparent interest in medicine and science make him the sort of man
who would have been interested in travel Uterature. Interesdngly there was a
'rouge Uvre appeUez Maundevylle' at Pleshey in 1397.''* EspeciaOy intriguing is
the manuscript of around 1400 that contains the Anglo-French version of the
Travels foDowed, in a sUghdy later hand, by a copy of Erghum's exposidon of
BridUngton's prophecies.*"'
    There is some correspondence between the Ufe and circumstances of the
author of Mandeville's Travels, as revealed in the text and the Liege tradidon, and
the history of the Bohuns in the fourteenth century. The most notable is the
fact that 'MandeviUe' claimed to have left England in Michaelmas 1322. EarUer
in the year the fourth earl of Hereford had led his retainers id rebeUion, and
the coUapse of the baronial cause at Boroughbridge presented a major crisis for
the Bohun affinity. The earl and a number of his retainers were kiUed, and the
earl's wife and children were imprisoned. Some members of the Bohun affinity
presumably sued for pardons, as Sir Thomas Mandeville of Black Nodey had
in 1313, For others, it might have seemed opportune to leave the country for a
while. Prior to the Batde of Boroughbridge, the fourth earl himself considered
seeking refuge in Hainault.™ Another prominent rebel. Sir John Maltravers, Bed
to the Condnent in 1322.^' If the author of the 7>af«/f invented 'Mandeville', he
could not have chosen a more plausible year for a man of that name to leave
England.'^ In Jean d'Outremeuse's elaboradon of the story, Mandeville fled
after killing a nobleman. It is just possible that his account is a garbled version
of events of the dme." After his release from prison John Bohun, the fifth
earl, went on a pUgrimage. A Bohun retainer might have done Ukewise in the
aftermath of Boroughbridge.
    The Bohun household is a possible milieu for the composidon of Mandeville's
Travels. It was a context in which the Mandeville name and the St Albans
connecdon had some meaning, and in which relevant books and sponsorship
may have been available. Even if — perhaps especiaUy if — the sixth earl was
effecdvely housebound, his mind ranged widely. In his will he left money for his
confessor to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem in his name.'"* WilUam de Bohun,
Earl of Northampton, the sixth earl's younger brother, was regularly in harness
in France. Needless to say, there were other prominent magnates - Uke Henry
of Grosmont, Duke of Lancaster, and Richard, Earl of Arundel, the Bohuns'
brother-in-law - who served as miUtary commanders and diplomats in France,
pardcipated in the francophone culture of the European nobility, and may have
brought a copy of le Long's anthology back to England. Such magnates had an
extensive cousinage on the Condnent. Of possible relevance to the associadon
of Liege with Mandeville's Travels, the Bohuns had connecdons in Brabant. In
September 1357 the EngUsh king sought a safe conduct from the Duke of
Brabant for WilUam to take seisin of land in Aarschot, Brabant, granted to him
by Godfrey de Harcourt.'*
    Needless to say, Edward III and members of the family played a major role
         MANDEVILLE'S TRAVELS AND THE ANGLO-FRENCH MOMENT                          281
in cross-Channel cultural exchange. IsabeUe of France, the king's mother, on
whom John Mandeville caUed in 1357, was an avid reader of French literature
in her youth. In the late 1350s her Ubrary included, alongside service books,
Brunetto Ladni's Tresor, one of MandeviUe's sources, and copies of KingArthur,
the Holy Crail, Sir Lancelot, Tristram and Isolde, Sir Perceval, and Sir Cawain?'' Her
friend and confidante Marie, dowager Countess of Pembroke, the daughter of
Guy de ChatiUon, comte de Saint-Pol, owned a copy of Codefroy de Bouillon. A
patron of letters and learning, she may have had a more impressive Ubrary than
Queen IsabeUe.^' The king's marriage to Philippa of Hainault in 1328 brought
to England a francophone princess even more closely attuned to contemporary
fashion. In the 1340s and 1350s she was drawing to the EngUsh royal court
poets Uke Jean de La Motte and Jean Froissart from the French-speaking Low
Countries.'* Edward himself was careless with books.'' It is nonetheless clear
that many books were to be found in court circles.^" With his imperial and
crusading ambidons, Edward would have been especially interested in travel
literature. A tournament of 13 31 in which combatants wore masks in the guise
of Tartars reflects familiarity at court with some of Mandeville's sources.*' In
1332 Roger de Stavegni presented the king with a copy of his crusading treadse
Du conquest de la Terre SainteF- Another book that may have come to the EngUsh
court at this dme is a Parisian manuscript of around 1350 that includes Marco
Polo and French transladons of a secdon of Vincent of Beauvais's Speculum
historiale (an abridgement of John of Piano Carpini's account of the Mongols),
Odoric of Pordenone's Itinerarius, and the Directorium ad faciendum passagium
transmarinum, aU sources of Mandeville's Travels^
    'MandeviUe' may have had access to books circuladng in the orbit of the
English royal court. In aU UkeUhood he made a presentadon copy of his work for
Edward III. An early group of Anglo-French manuscripts contain a dedicadon
to 'the most exceUent prince, to be chiefly reverenced above all mortals, to the
Lord Edward, by divine providence most serene king of France and England,
lord of Ireland, duke of Aquitaine ...'.*'' It has been too readily dismissed as
spurious. Though not stricdy correct in the late 1350s, the dde was exacdy that
proclaimed in 1340, and still in use on the king's great seal.*' Though the phrasing
of the address may appear extravagant, it is by no means implausible, especiaUy
in a Uterary dedicadon. Forms of address to Edward were becoming more
grandiloquent at this dme. One peddoner addressed him in 1360 as 'the mighdest
king of aU the world'.*'' It should be noted that the dedicadon to Edward III
was assumed to be authendc by the Meaux chronicler in Yorkshire in the late
fourteenth century,*' and in the tradidons preserved at Liege.**
    It is indeed hard to imagine any author of French secular Uterature in the
1350s not seeking to bring his work to the attendon of Edward III. The date of
the Anglo-French version of the Travels — 1356 - assumes special significance
in the EngUsh context. During the winter of 1355-6, with David King of Scots
his prisoner in London, Edward III led an army north, and recaptured Berwick.
In January 1356 Edward BaUiol, the EngUsh candidate to the Scotdsh crown,
surrendered his dde to the EngUsh king, and Edward advanced into Scodand,
282                               MEDIUM ^ V U M                          LXXV2
with the Scotdsh royal standard borne before him, as if entering into his own
kingdom.*' In spring he launched a major assault on France, with an army under
the Duke of Lancaster invading Normandy while the Black Prince advanced
through Poitou towards the Loire. The French realm was faUing apart — with
popular risings spreading from Picardy across northern France - even before
the catastrophic defeat of the French royal host at Poiders in September. As
Kingjean of France and other French notables surrendered to the Black Prince,
the government in Paris had Utde choice but to sue for peace. In spring 1357,
as the French realm struggled to raise the agreed ransoms, the French king and
his comrades were shipped from Bordeaux to England. With a brief period of
parole in 1360, Kingjean was in England from 1357 undl his death in 1364.
    In the late 1350s and the early 1360s England could claim to be the centre of
the francophone world. In May 1357 the Black Prince led the French king, riding
a white steed, into London.'" With the King of Scots in the Tower of London,
the French king was lodged in the Duke of Lancaster's splendid Savoy palace.'' A
great banquet was held at Westminster 'to honour the great splendour of royalty
never seen before in England'. Edward III of England sat at the centre of the
high table, with King Jean on his right and King David on his left.'^ Over the
summer London was thronged with notables from across France and Europe.
On 3 July the papal legates TaUeyrand de Perigord, cardinal bishop of Albano,
and Nicholas Capocci, cardinal priest of St VitaUs, arrived, and were presented
to the king at Westminster. Finding him seated on his throne, with imperial
trappings and a Uon-Uke countenance, the cardinals prostrated themselves before
him." In autumn there was a grand tournament at Smithfield, disdnguished by
the presence of the three kings, and over the Christmas season jousts and revels
at Marlborough and a rare and unusually splendid night-dme tournament in
Bristol.''' They turned out to be merely dress rehearsals for the major event of
 1358, a tournament at the newly renovated Windsor Casde on St George's Day
to coincide with the feast of the Order of the Garter. The fesdvides were weU
attended, with King Jean the guest of honour, and the Duke of Brabant and
other foreign lords drawn to England by the glory of the new Arthur and the
prospect of the new Camelot.''
    The arrival in England of the French king and other noble capdves from
Poiders doubdess provided an important sdmulus to Anglo-French cultural
producdon and exchange. It certainly gave the king's mother the opportunity to
meet congenial compatriots and catch up on Parisian fashion. IsabeUe probably
attended the recepdon held for them in London on 24 May 1357."' In October
a pilgrimage to Canterbury enabled her to spend dme in the capital, and on her
return to Hertford she made a loan of the Holj Crail and Sir Lancelot to King
Jean." In November she entertained Jacques de Bourbon, comte de la Marche,
and Jean de Melun, comte de TancarviUe, accompanied by the book-loving Earl
of SaUsbury.'* Over Christmas she shared Mandeville's venison with Arnauld
sire d'Audenham, marshal of France, and Regnaut sire d'Aubigny, seneschal of
Toulouse, and exchanged New Year gifts with King Jean." In the early months
of 1358 she entertained the marshal of France, the comte de TancarviUe, and
        MANDEVJLLE'S       TRAVELS AND THE ANGLO-FRENCH MOMENT                    283
the Archbishop of Sens.'"" In April, e« rou/e for Windsor, Isabelle hosted dinners
for French nobles in London and Sheen."" After attending the Garter feast and
celebrations at Windsor, she returned to London, entertaining her new-found
friends and facilitating the peace process. On 12 May she celebrated the signing
of the Treaty of London by hosting a banquet for two cardinals, the Archbishop
of Sens, and other French noblemen.'"^
    In the event peace proved hard to achieve, and it took another royal exped-
ition to France in 1359—60 before Edward IIIfinallywearied of war. During this
time Kingjean remained a captive, firstly at Hertford Castle, vacated by Queen
Isabelle's demise in August 1358, and later at Somerton in Lincolnshire. On at
least one occasion he and his companions visited St Albans, and made offerings
at the shrine.'"' In this circumscribed world they would surely have heard the
Mandeville name. It would be nice to think that the parker of Enfield brought
the French king venison. King Jean, a keen huntsman, was allowed to hunt
occasionally, and may well have hunted in Enfield Chase. While at Hertford
Castle he set his chaplain Gace de La Buigne to work on Le Roman des deduis, a
hunting treatise that drew on his experiences in England.'""* Kingjean certainly
had ample time for reading, and his accounts record acquisition of books in
London and later, when in captivity at Somerton, in Lincoln.'"^ His purchases in
Lincoln may attest not so much the quality of bookshops in provincial England
as the enterprise of dealers in the prizes of war. Needless to say, the captive king
and his companions would have relished a work like Mandeville's Travels.
The mystery at the heart of Mandeville's Travels wiU never be wholly resolved.
Despite the immense labour that has gone into the examination of the
manuscripts,""" there is scope for more detailed textual scholarship. The fact that
the earliest extant manuscript of the Travels was written in Anglo-French should
provide an important new focus for this work."" Fifty years ago Josephine
Bennett argued, though in rather summary fashion, for the priority of the 7\nglo-
French version on textual and stylistic grounds. More recently, Christiane Deluz
has given support to this position, though still without presenting her analysis in
detail. In the English-speaking world, however, the weight of opinion remains
that the Travels was originally written in France, with considerable reliance
placed on considerations of cultural context, not least the greater availability of
'MandeviUe's' sources.'"^ A review of cultural conditions in France and England
in the 1350s, however, would suggest that such a disposition in favour of a
continental provenance is by no means warranted. All in all, there is no good
reason to doubt that the Travels was originally written in Anglo-French.
    The parker of Enfield is not an entirely credible candidate for the authorship
of the Travels. He may well have been born and raised in St Albans, but he was
not a knight. If he can be identified with the 38-year-old witness in an inquisition
at Enfield in 1354, he would have been rather young to have left England in
 1322."" There are other references that, on the assumpdon that they relate to the
same man, appear not only to clip his wings, but also to present him as a local
bully."" Still his closeness to the bookish Earl of Hereford is some testimony
 284                                   MEDIUM
 to his character, and there is Leland's tradition that the author of the Travels
 lived at Enfield.'" In the end the parker of Enfield may not be able to do more
 than serve as surrogate for the author. He connects the name and place, and
 the connection - known not only to most Englishman, but even perhaps to
 the King of France - underlines the seriousness of the prologue's claims to
 authenticity. His activities in 1357 link his world with a number of contexts in
which an ambitious work in Anglo-French could have been produced. He can
 at least hold the place for other John Mandevilles of his kin and ken, one of
whom, thus far unrecorded, may have been a knight-pilgrim."^
     Finally, the context presented for the composition of Mandeville's Travels
 may help explain some remarkable features of the manuscript tradition. It is
 clear that, in whatever circumstances the original was composed, it achieved a
 remarkably rapid circulation. From what can be discerned from the extant manu-
 scripts, it was copied early and often in Anglo-French, and rapidly reworked and
widely circulated in northern France. For an author seeking to launch his work
in the late 1350s, the circumstances in England were uniquely favourable."' The
 dedication to Edward III, and the Liege tradition that Mandeville returned to
 England after the conclusion of the Anglo-French wars, fit the Anglo-French
 moment."'' The presence of King Jean and other French nobles in England
provides a very plausible explanation of the early dissemination of Mandeville's
 Travels'm France."' One of the members of the French king's household may have
been responsible for reworking it into Parisian French. This contextualization
may even explain the curious anomaly - always noted, never explained - that the
Anglo-French and French versions are variously dated 1356 and 1357. Completed
 and presented to Edward III in 1356, the Travels could well have been reworked
and, literally, updated by a Frenchman in England in 1357.
University of Tasmania                                         MICHAEL J. BENNETT
Hobart
                                          NOTES
I would like to thank Professor Ralph Hanna for his critique of this article, for the leads
he has provided, and for the errors he has corrected.
' British Library, Cotton MS Galba E.xiv. For a fuller account of this remarkable set
of accounts, and the light they throw on Queen Isabelle's activities and interests in the
last year of her life, see Michael J. Bennett, 'Isabelle of France, Anglo-French diplomacy
and cultural exchange in the late 1550s', in The Age of Edward III, ed. J. S. Bothwell
 (Woodbridge, 2001), pp. 215-25.
^ BL, Cotton MS Gallia E.xiv, fol. 50'.
' Jean de Mandeville: Le Livre des merveilles du monde., ed. C. Deluz (Paris, 2000), pp. 92f.,
" J. W. Bennett, The Rediscovery of SirJohn Mandeville (New York, 1954).
 •
* MandeviUe: Le Livre des merveilles du monde, ed. Deluz, p. 14.
^ For this specific claim, still requiring detailed substantiation, see M. C. Seymour, Sir
John Mandeville (Aidershot, 1995), pp. 5f. There is no edition of le Long's anthology, and
          MANDBVILLE'S        TRAVEU       AND THE ANGLO-FRENCH MOMENT                      28;
 its manuscript tradition requires detailed study. The earliest extant copy in England, BL,
 Otho D.i, is dated c.i^)o: iljid., p. lo.
 ' Ibid., pp. 5f.
 * Bibliotheque nationale de France, MS fr. 4515-4516, edited in Mandeville's Travels: Texts
 and Translations, ed. M. H. Letts, 2 vols, Hakluyt Society, 2nd series 101, 102 (London,
  195}). Raoulet d'Orleans made it for M° Gervaise Chretien, the king's physician, who
 presented it to Charles V.
 ' Seymour, Sir John Mandeville, pp. 38-49; C. Deluz, Z^ Livre de Jehan de Mandeville: Une
  'geographie' auXlVe siecle, Textes, etudes, congres 8 (Louvain-la-Neuve, 1988), pp. 271-82;
 I. M. Higgins, Writing East: The 'Travels of Sir John Mandeville' (Philadelphia, Pa, 1997), pp.
 6-8; R. Tzanacki, Mandeville's Medieval Audiences: A Study on the Reception of the Book of Sir
Jobn Mandeville (ijyi-i;;o) (Aidershot, 2005).
 '" The Anglo-French version appears in twenty-five manuscripts. The standard edition
is MandeviUe: Le Livre des merveilles du monde, ed. Deluz, based on BL, Harley MS 212.
For Anglo-French, and its importance as a medium of literary expression in England
in the third quarter of the fourteenth century, see W. Rothwell, 'The "faus franceis
d'Angleterre"; later Anglo-Norman', in Anglo-Norman Anniversary Essays, ed. I. Short
 (London, 1993), pp. 309-26; W. Rothwell, 'Henry of Lancaster and Geoffrey Chaucer:
Anglo-French and Middle English in fourteenth-century England', Modern Language
Review, 99 (2004), 313-27.
 " Mandeville's Travels, Translated from the French of Jean d'Outremeuse, ed. P. Hamelius, 2 vols,
EETS, OS 153, 154 (Oxford, 1919, 1923); Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandeville, chs i o - i i; R.
Lejeune, 'Jean de Mandeville et les Liegeois', in Melanges de linguistique romane et de philologie
medievale offerts a M. Maurice Delhouille, ed. J. Renson and M. Tyssens (Gembloux, 1964),
pp. 409-37.
'^ Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandeville, esp. ch. 7.
" G. de Poerck, 'La tradition manuscrite des "Voyages" de Jean de MandevUle', Romanica
 Gandensia, 4 (1956), 125-58.
" Seymour, SirJohn Mandeville, pp. iof. In a recent edidon of tbe defective Middle English
version Seymour claims categorically, though with no further evidence, that the Travels v^&s
written 'by an unknown author, a Benedictine in an abbey in northern France': The Defective
  Version of Mandeville's 'Travels', ed. M. C. Seymour, EETS 319 (Oxford, 2002), p. xi. In the
endnotes, he likewise states tbat the Benedictine monk studied at Paris: ibid., p. 173.
'^ Deluz, Le Livre de Jehan de Mandevilk, pp. 71 f.; Mandeville: Le Livre des merveilles du monde,
ed. Deluz, p. 14.
" Following Seymour's dassificatory scheme, Deluz has listed eleven extant texts in the
subgroup that includes a dedication to Edward III: M. C. Seymour, 'The scribal tradition
of Mandeville's Travek: tbe insular version'. Scriptorium, 18 (1964), 36f.; Mandeville: Le Livre
des merveilles du monde, ed. Deluz, pp. 36-46. The Latin dedication is to be found in The
Buke of lohn Maunduill, ed. Sir G. Warner (Westminster, 1889), p. xxix. For a translation,
see Mandeville's Travek, ed. Hamelius, II, 14.
" Chronica monasterii de Melsa, ed. E. A. Bond, 3 vols. Rolls Series (London, 1866-8), IU,
 15 8f. Tbe chronicle assumed its final form in the 1390s, but it is likely that the passage
in question was written a decade or so earlier.
" Annales monasterii Sancti Albani a Johannes de Amundesham, ed. H. T. Riley, 2 vols. Rolls
Series (London, 1871), II, 306.
" Ibid., p. 331.
^" M. C. Seymour, 'A letter from "Sir John Mandeville" ', Notes and Queries, 219 (1974),
326-8.
                                       MEDIUM ^ V U M                                 LXXV.2
^' Joannis Rossi antiquarii Warwicensis historia regum Angliae, ed. T. Hearne (London, 1716),
pp. 4f.
^^ Commentarii de scriptoribus Britannids auctore Joanne Lelando Londinate, ed. A. HaU (Oxford,
 1709). PP- 366-8.
^' Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandeville, p. 213.
'•• Ibid., pp. 9if.
^^ Ibid., p. 96 n. 2.
^ The order dated back to the mid-twelftb century. The Liege convent was founded in
   ^
 1287: ibid., p. 90.
^' 'Hie jacet nobilis dominus Ioannes de Montevilla, miles, alias dictus ad barbam,
 dominus de Compredi, natus de Anglia, medicinae professor, et devotissimus orator, et
 bonorum suorum largissimus pauperibus erogator, qui totum otbem peragrauit in stratu
Leodii diem vitae suae clausit extremum, anno domini mceclxxii mensis Februari vii'
 ('Here lies master Jobn of Montevilla knight alias ad Barbam, master of Compredi, born
 in England, professor of medicine and most devout in prayer, and most liberal giver of
 bis goods to the poor, wbo travelled over tbe wbole world. He ended tbe last day of bis
 life in a bouse in Liege, in tbe year of our Lord, 1372, tbe seventb day of tbe montb of
 February'). Later transcripts suggest tbat tbe date was 'novembris die xvii' ('seventeentb
 day of November'): ibid., p. 90 n. 3.
^' Jean d'Outremeuse's Ly Myreur des histors contains mucb tbat is fanciful, not least bis
incorporation into historical narrative of tbe romance of Ogier tbe Dane and otber
 matter designed to appeal to tbe inbabitants of Liege.
^' Seymour outlines three stages by wbicb Jean de Bourgogne is written into tbe
Mandeville tradition: 'ir.1373 tbe Liege version claims "Mandeville" met Jean de
Bourgogne at Liege, botb baving previously served tbe Sultan in Cairo; in 1375/6 tbe
 Latin translation develops tbe claim tbat Jean urged "Mandeville" to write down bis
 account of tbe world; sometime after 1388 d'Outremeuse (d. 1400) claims first tbat
 "Mandeville" wrote a lapidary and tben tbat Jean de Bourgogne was "Mandeville" ':
 Seymour, SirJohn Mandeville, p. 30.
 * Mandeville: Le Livre des merveilles du monde, ed. Deluz, p. 14.
 ^' J. R. S. PbiUips, 'Tbe quest for Sir Jobn MandeviUe', in The Culture of Christendom: Essays
 in Medieval History in Commemoration of Denis L T. Bethell (London, 1993), pp. 243-55,
 esp. pp. 254f
 ^ Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandeville, p. 146; de Poetck, 'La tradition manuscrite des
   ^
 "Voyages" dejean de MandeviUe', pp. 125-58. Tbere is stiU scope for a detailed coUation
 and systematic comparison of the continental and insular texts. Tbe most substantial
 work bas been done on tbe Anglo-Frencb texts: Seymour, 'Tbe scribal tradition of
 Mandeville's Travels: tbe insular version', pp. 34-48; Mandevilk Le Livre des merveilles du
 monde, ed. Deluz, pp. 28—81.
 ^' Seymour, Sir John Mandeville, pp. 23f.
 ''' L. Karl, Un moraliste bourbonnais du XlVe siecle et son ceuvre: I^ 'Roman de Mandevie' et les
  'Melancolie' dejean Dupin (Paris, 1912); Seymour, SirJohn Mandeville, pp. i3£; PbiUips, 'Tbe
 quest for Sir Jobn MandeviUe', pp. 249f.
 ^' Deluz, Le Uvre de Jehan de Mandeville, p. 67.
 '" Amid tbe feasts, tournaments, and diplomacy, Henry of Lancaster found time in 1354
 to write Le Lyvre de seynt^ medicines. Tbe monks of Saint-Bertin, wbo bad every reason to
 appeal to tbe duke's better nature, could bave cbosen no better gift for bim tban le Long's
 anthology. It sbould be noted too tbat tbe Abbey of Saint-Bertin bad close relations witb
 Cbristcburcb, Canterbury: see Literae Cantuarienses: The Letter Books of the Monastery of
  Christ Church, Cambridge, ed.j. B. Sbeppard, RoUs Series (London, 1889), III, 140-4.
          MANDEVILLE'S       TRAVEI^     AND THE A N G L O - F R E N C H MOMENT             287
" Tbe King of France reputedly offered many gifts, but aU tbat Henry would accept
 from bim was a reUc, a tborn from Jesus' crown of tborns: Knighton's Chronicle i})j-i}96,
 ed. G. H. Martin (Oxford, 1995), pp. i i 8 f For tbe visit to Paris, see also J. Sumption,
 The Hundred Years War, II: Trial by Fire (London, 1999), pp. ii2f.
'" Tbe Bible, sold by tbe Black Prince to tbe Earl of Salisbury for 100 marks, survives
 as BL, Royal MS 19 D.ii. SaUsbury may bave acquired a copy of tbe Frencb romance of
Melusine in tbis fasbion. Wben in tbe 1580s tbe Duke of Berry wisbed to bave a copy made
 for bis sister be bad to borrow it from SaUsbury's coUection: BL, Royal MS 18 B.ii.
' ' Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandeville, pp. 135-9.
'"' De Poerck, 'La tradition manuscrite des "Voyages" dejean de MandeviUe', pp. i54f
•" Mandeville: Le Livre des merveilles du monde, ed. Deluz, pp. 35—6.
"^ Seymour's important work on tbe affiUation of tbe Anglo-Frencb manuscripts and
 •
English and Latin translations has led him over tbe years to push back the beginnings
 from 1375 to as early as 1365: Seymour, 'Tbe scribal tradition of Mandeville's Travek:
the insular version', 48; The Defective Version of Mandeville's 'Travels', ed. Seymour, p. xi.
Interestingly, BL, Sloane MS 560, tbougb a fifteentb-century manuscript, contains, along
witb tbe Travels, a bistory of England in Latin verse from tbe birtb of Edward III until
 1346, and tben a continuation in prose until 1358.
"^ Tbe Parisian text is represented in tbirty manuscripts - some very late - and tbe Liege
text in seven manuscripts: Le Livre des merveilles du monde, ed. Deluz, pp. 29f.
•''' BnF, MS fr. 5635, anc. Colbert 3112; BnF, MS fr. 281 o: MandeviUe: Le Livre des merveilles
du monde, ed. Deluz, pp. 50—3.
"^ Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandeville, pp. lyof
 •
"" Sotbeby's, Western Manuscripts and Miniatures: London, ij June i^Sj (London, 1987), lot
 84, pp. i04f Tbe manuscript formerly belonged to tbe Duke of Mancbester. I tbank
Professor Ralpb Hanna for bringing tbe manuscript to my attention, and Professor Hanna
and Dr Cbristopber de Hamel for sending me copies of the catalogue entry.
"" Sotbeby's, Western Manuscripts and Miniatures, p. 10;. Tbe fragment was bougbt by
Quaritcb on bebalf of a private coUector. Dr Ricbard Linentbal at Quaritcb was unable
to disclose tbe coUector's name. I tbank Dr de Hamel, Professor Hanna, and Emeritus
Professor Rodney Thomson for confirming tbe dating of tbe bandwriting as mid-
 fourteentb century.
•"' BL, Cotton MS Galba E.xiv, fol. jo'.
•" J. Nicbols, A Collection of Wills ... of the Kings and Queens of England (London, 1780),
p. 52; Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandeville, p. 203.
^ Commentarii de scriptoribus Britannids auctore Joanne Lelando Londinate, ed. Hall, pp. 366-8;
Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandeville, p. 2 1 ; .
^' Dr James Carley, wbo is preparing a scbolarly edition of Leland's work for Oxford
Medieval Texts under the tide De viris illustribus, bas kindly informed me tbat tbe
manuscript bas a deleted note explaining tbat HainviUa is Enfield: 'et nomen uel dedisse,
uel accepisse, a uiUa quam uulgus EnuiUe corrupte uocat. Est autem EnuiUa sita in
prouincia Ceruiniana, siue Hertfordensi, ad decimum a Londino lapidem.'
^^ Tbe manor bouse was Elsings in Enfield. Gunn refers to it as a 'great palace ...
deUberately buUt, Mke an Elizabetban prodigy bouse, to accommodate tbe king and queen
on progress': S. Gunn, 'Sir Thomas LoveU (r. 1449-1524): a new man in a new monarcby?',
in The End of the Middle Ages'? England in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries, ed. J. L. Watts
 (Stroud, 1998), p. 152.
" For an account of tbe Bohuns, earls of Hereford in tbe fourteentb century, see Com-
plete Peerage, ed. G. E. Cockayne, s.v. 'Hereford', and G. Holmes, The Estates of the Higher
Nobility in Fourieenth-Century England (London, 1957), esp. pp. 19—25.
                                      MEDIUM ^EVUM
" Tbe Bobuns were one of a number of noble bouses tbat claimed descent from Eneas
tbe 'swan-knigbt', and adopted swan insignia. See A. R. Wagner, 'Tbe swan badge and
tbe swan knight', Archaeologia, 117 (1956), 127—38, witb plates.
^^ BL, Royal MS 20 D.iv; Lucy Freeman Sandier, A Survey of Manuscripts Illuminated in the
British Isles, V: CothicManuscripts uSj-ijS;, 1 vols (London, 1986), II, 154f
5' Tbe National Arcbives [bereafter TNA], PubUc Record Office [hereafter PRO], DL
 25/29. Le Livre de Sydrac was written in tbe late tbirteentb century. For an edition of an
EngUsb translation, see Sidrak and Bokkus, ed. T. L. Burton, 2 vols, EETS (Oxford, 1998,
 1999). Tbougb copies of tbe Frencb work circulated in England, and tbe work proved
popular in EngUsb translation, tbere is no evidence of a distinct Anglo-Frencb version.
" Calendar of Patent Rolls rjjo-j^, p. 12.
^' Calendar of Patent Rolls i}j8-40, p. 91.
*' Political Poems and Songs Relating to English History, ed. T. Wrigbt, 2 vols, RoUs Series
 (London, 1859, 1861), I, i23f
'" A letter patent of tbe seventb earl of Hereford dated at 'Camelot' on 10 May 1370
mystified its editors ('Camelot, county unidentified'): 'Private indentures for Hfe service
in peace and war, 1278-1476', ed. M. Jones and S. Walker, in Camden Miscellany XXXII,
Camden Society, ;tb series, 3 (London, 1994), pp. 83 f. It was tbe manor bouse at Enfield
for wbicb tbe sixtb earl sougbt a Ucence to creneUate in 1349: Calendar of Patent Rolls,
i^j—^S, p. 450. Tbe property descended to Mary Bobun, wife of tbe future Henry IV,
and tbence to tbe crown as part of tbe Ducby of Lancaster. In 1440 tbe buildings in
'our manor caUed le Camelot were demolisbed to fund repairs, coincidentaUy enougb, for
Hertford Castle: TNA, PRO, DL 42, 18, fol. 148". In general see Victoria County History: A
History of Middlesex, V, 224 and H. M. Colvin (ed.). The History of King's Works: The Middle
Ages, 2 vols (London, 1963), II, 68on.
" M. R. James and E. G. MiUar, The Bohun Manuscripts (Oxford, 1936); Sandier, Gothic
Manuscripts 128;—ij8;, II, 147—65; L. Freeman Sandier, 'A note on tbe iUuminators of tbe
Bobun manuscripts'. Speculum, 60 (1985), 364—72.
'^ L. F. Sandier, 'Lancastrian beraldry in tbe Bobun manuscripts', in The Lancastrian
 Court Proceedings of the 2001 Harlaxton Symposium, ed. J. Stratford (Donington, 2003), pp.
 221—32.
'^ In 1362 the Black Prince paid £20 for three psalters formerly belonging to the sixth
earl: Register of Edward the Black Prince, FV, 476. See also L. Dennison, ' "Tbe Fitzwarin
Psalter and its aUies": a reappraisal', in England in the Fourteenth Century, ed. W. M. Ormrod
(Woodbridge, 1986), pp. 43-66; L. Dennison, 'Oxford, Exeter CoUege, MS. 47: tbe
importance of stylistic and codicological analysis in its dating and locaUzation', in Medieval
Book Production: Assessing the Evidence, ed. L. Brownrigg (Los Altos Hills, CaUf, 1990),
pp. 41-6; L. F. Sandier, 'Tbe illustration of tbe psalms in fourteentb-century EngUsb
manuscripts: tbree psalters of tbe Bobun famUy', in Reading Texts and Images: Essays on
Medieval and Renaissance Art and Patronage in Honour of Margaret M. Manion, ed. B. J. Muir
(Exeter, 2002). esp. pp. i26f
" F. Rotb, The English Austin Friars 124^-1;jS (New York, 1966), p. 487.
" William of Palerne, ed. W. W Skeat, EETS, ES I (Oxford, 1867), Unes 164-8, 5 529-33.
Written in tbe dialect of tbe soutb-west Midlands, it was presumably produced for tbe
benefit of tbe sixtb earl's retainers in Herefordsbire, not bis immediate entourage: T.
TurviUe-Petre, 'Humpbrey de Bobun and William of Palerne', Neuphilologische Mitteilungen,
75 (1974), 250—2; T. Turville-Petre, The Alliterative Revival {i!)-!-!), pp. 4of.
" Medieval Manuscripts in British Libraries, I: London, ed. N. R. Ker (Oxford, 1969), p. 344.
Tbe reference is a fifteentb-century addition to a medical misceUany compUed in tbe late
fourteentb century. University CoUege London, MS Lat. 12. Botb Jobn, tbe fiftb earl, and
           MANDEVILLE'S TRAVELS AND THE A N G L O - F R E N C H MOMENT                      289
 Humphrey, the seventh and last earl, died around the age of 30, and neither would have
 had time to acquire this sort of reputation, Humphrey, the sixth earl, who lived into his
 fifties, is the likeliest candidate,
 " Erghum was an Augustinian friar from the York convent, and presumably his
association with the Bohuns began with the sixth earl. The work was composed around
 1563, only a year or so after the sixth earl's death. In general see P, Meyvaert, 'John
Erghome and the Vatidnium Roberti de Bridlington', Speculum., 41 (1966), 656-64,
'* Viscount DiUon and W, H, St John Hope, 'Inventory of the goods and chattels
 belonging to Thomas, Duke of Gloucester, and seized in his castle of Pleshy, co, Essex,
 21 Richard II (1397); with their values, as shown on the escheator's SLCCOMOXS', Archaeological
Journal., 14 (1897), 300—3, It is generally assumed that many of the books at Pleshey had
been inherited from the Bohuns: A, Goodman, The Loyal Conspiracj: The Lords Appellant
 under Richard II (^nAon., 1971), pp, 8of, According to Moseley, the Mandeville, valued
at 3^^, 4(/,, may have been quite a handsome manuscript: C, W, R, D, Moseley, 'Chaucer,
Sir John Mandeville and the Alliterative Revival: a hypothesis concerning relationships'.
Modern Philology., 72 (1974 ), i83n,
" Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Ashmole 1804,1 would like to thank Emeritus Professor
R, M, Thomson for examining this manuscript for me,
™ J, R, S, Vhi]]ips, Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, ipj—ij24 (Oxford, 1972), p, 224,
" Phillips, 'Quest for Sir John MandeviUe', p, 252 n, 36,
'^ Seymour suggests that Mandeville's date of departure from England, 'on St Michael's
day' 1322, may have been taken from the date of the dedication of WiUiam von
Boldensele's Itinerarium, 'on St Michael's day' 1537, especiaUy if the author of the Travels
used a manuscript of the Itinerarium in which the year 'm, iii, xxxvii,' had been misrendered
'm, iii, xxii': Seymour, SirJohn Mandeville, pp, i4f,
" Bennett, Rediscovery of MandeviUe, pp, 91 f Mandeville's flight from England after the
death of the Earl of Hereford in 1322 might be the basis of d'Outremeuse's story of
MandeviUe's fleeing the country after his killing an earl, J, R, S, Phillips has pointed out
some points of correspondence between the career of Sir John Maltravers and Jean
d'Outremeuse's MandeviUe, Maltravers escaped from England in 1322, returning with
Queen IsabeUe in 1326, His role in the captivity of Edward II and the death of the Earl
of Kent led to a second flight overseas in 1330, He spent over two decades in the Low
Countries before he secured a royal pardon in 1351, He died in England in 1364: PhiUips,
'Quest for Sir John MandeviUe', pp, 2; if,
" Nichols, Collection of Wills ... of the Kings and Queens of England, p, 54,
" TNA, PRO, DL 34/18,
' ' TNA, PRO, E 101/393/4 (Inventory of IsabeUe of France's goods), fol, 8'; BL, Cotton
MS Galba E,xiv, fol, 50',
" The founder of Pembroke CoUege, Cambridge, she only mentions her devotional
books in her wiU: H, Jenkinson, 'Mary de Sancto Paulo, foundress of Pembroke CoUege,
Cambridge', v4nrteo/(9g/fl, 2nd series, 16 (191 i)> 401-46, esp, pp, 432-;, She owned at
least one romance, A clerk in her service wrote a eulogy of her late husband in ornate
Latin verse in 1363: Jenkinson, 'Mary de Sancto Paulo', pp, 443-6, Her copy of Codefroy
de Bouillon found its way into the French royal Mbrary in the Louvre, presumably another
gift or loan to the French king: Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandevilk, p, 172 n, 8,
' ' J, Vale, Edward III and Chivalry: Chivalric Society and its Context i2yo-ijjo (Woodbridge,
 1982), pp, 4;f; N, Wilkins, 'Music and poetry at court: England and France in the late
Middle Ages', in English Court Culture in the Later Middle Ages, ed, V, J, Scattergood and J, W
Sherborne (London, 1983), pp, 190-4; J, I, Wimsatt, Chaucer and his French Contemporaries:
Natural Music in the Fourteenth Century (Toronto, 1992),
290                                   MEDIUM ^ V U M                                 LXXV,2
" W, M, Ormrod, 'The personal religion of Edward III', Speculum, 64 (1989), 857,
"" Vz\t, Edward III and Chivalry,'p. 50,
"' Ibid,, pp, 70-2,
»^ Ibid,, p, ; i ,
*' BL, Royal MS 19 D,i, This book, with its crusading focus, begins with the romance
of Alexander the Great and concludes with accounts of the wars of the kings of Israel
extracted from the Bible historiale. D, J, A, Ross, 'Methods of book-production in a XlVth
century misceUany (London, B,M, MS, Royal 19 D, I,)', Scriptorium, 6 (1952), 63-75, There
is no indication of when it came to England, but it can probably be identified with the
book 'Le bon roy Alexandre' listed in the royal library in 1535: The Libraries of King Henry
 VIII, ed, J, P, Carley (London, 2000), item H 1 / 9 1 , pp, 23f
*'' 'Principi exceUentissimo, pre cunctis mortalibus precipue venerando domino Edwardo,
divina providentia Francorum et Anglorum regi serenissimo, Hibernie domino, Aquitanie
duci, mari ac ejus insulis occidentalibus dominanti, christianorum eufamie et ornatui,
universorumque arma gerentium tutori, ac probitatis et strenuitatis exemplo; principi
quoque invicto, mirabiiis Alexandri sequaci, ac universo orbi tremendo; cum reverentia,
non qua decet (cum ad talem et tantam reverentiam minus sufficientes exsdterint) sed qua
parvitas et possibilitas mittentis et offerentis se extendunt, contenta tradantur': Buke of
lohn Maundeuill, ed, Warner, p, xwi; Mandeville's Travels, ed, Hamelius, II, 14, The dedication
is a feature of Seymour's insular manuscripts, subgroup A: Seymour, 'The scribal tradition
of Mandeville's Travels: the insular version', pp, 36f,
°* W, M, Ormrod, 'A problem of precedence: Edward III, the double monarchy, and
the royal style', in Age of Edward HI, ed, Bothwell, pp, 135-55. esp, pp, 15;, 145, If
the dedication is a fabrication, it seems unlikely to be a late one, though France was
occasionally placed before England in the 1420s,
'^ Ibid,, p, 152,
*' Chronica monasterii de Melsa, III, 15 8f Meaux Abbey on Humberside had good access
to information from the capital. Many chancery clerks came from, and retained links
with, the area: J, L, Grassi, 'Royal clerks from the archdiocese of York in the fourteenth
centaty', Northern History, ; (1970), 12-33,
'* In ChantiUy, Musee Conde MS 699 the Liege version of Mandeville's Travels is followed
by four scientific tracts attributed to Mandeville: Seymour, SirJohn Mandeville, p, 51, The
third item includes a sort of dedication to Edward III as 'king of England and Scodand'
dated 1357: Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandeville, pp, I25f
" C, Rogers, War Cruel and Sharp: English Strategy under Edward III, /^^/-/^tfb (Woodbridge,
 2000), pp, 335-40,
'" Jean Froissart, (Euvres, ed, Kervyn de Lettenhove, 24 vols (Brussels, 1870-7), VI, i3f;
Knighton's Chronicle, pp, 15of; R, Delachenal, Histoire de Charles V, ; vols (Paris, 1909-51),
II, 54 and note,
" The Anonimalle Chronicle, ij}}-Si, ed, V, H, Galbraith (Manchester, 1927), p, 41;
 Knighton, seemingly wridng from the perspecdve of spring 1358, wrote that the French
king was at Windsor while the Scots king was at the Tower of London: Knighton's Chronicle,
pp, i52f,
'^ The KirkstallAbbey Chronicles, ed, J, Taylor, Thoresby Society 42 (London, 1952), p, 62,
An image in one of the Bohun psalters may capture the spirit of this time. It depicts
 Edward astride a rampant lion. Above him, the French king hands him his sword. Below
 him another king, presumably David of Scodand, glumly nurses his sword: Sandier,
 Cothic Manuscripts I28j—ij8!, II, 153, where it is suggested that the lower king might be
Charles of Navarre,
'^ Knighton's Chronicle,'pp. 150—3,
         MANDEVILLE'S TRAVELS AND THE A N G L O - F R E N C H MOMENT                      291
^'^ The Countess of Ulster was with the court at Marlborough, It thus seems likely that
Geoffrey Chaucer, her page, witnessed the fesdvides, Chaucer Life Records, part in, ed, E, A,
Bond and W D, Selby (London, 1886), For the Bristol tournament, see Eulogium historiarum
sive temporis, ed, F, S, Haydon, 3 vols. Rolls Series (London, 18; 8-6;), III, 227,
'^ One chronicler predictably enthused that there had not been such a display of chivalry
since the dme of King Arthur: Eulogium historiarum. III, 227, Henry Knighton simply
stated that the splendour of the occasion was beyond his powers to relate: Knighton's
 Chronicle, pp, i5 8f,
*' There is no record that she attended, but her steward, John atte Legh, was knighted
at her request and granted an annuity around this dme: Calendar oJ Patent Rolls i)jf-i^j8,
p. 580,
" BL, Cotton MS Galba E.xiv, fol, 50',
" Ibid,, fols 4', 5', Tancarville was accompanied by the Earl of Salisbury who acquired
French books looted in France,
" Ibid,, fol, 7',
'»" Ibid,, fols 9^-10', 13',
"" Ibid,, fol, 15',
'"2 Ibid,
1 3 p Newcome, History of the Abbey of St Albans (London, 1795), p, 250,
  0
' " L, Delisle, Recherches sur la librairie de Charles K (Paris, 1907), part i, p, 331; Wilkins,
'Music and poetry at court', pp, 194f
'"^ He purchased a psalter, a Roman de Renard, a Garin le Loherain, and a Tournament of
Antichrist, mainly from booksellers in Lincoln: Delisle, Librairie de Charles V, p. 331,
'"' Seymour, 'The scribal tradidon of Mandeville's Travels: the insular version'; Mandeville:
Le Livre des merveilles du monde, ed, Deluz, pp, 36-81, For a cridque and some correcdons
of the latter, see M, C, Seymour's review in AfcE, 73 (2004), 132-4,
"" The lines reproduced in the Sotheby's catalogue, however, are more useful for
palaeographical than textual analysis. They are from the end of chapter xv, and include
the Ladn alphabet along with the alleged 'Arabic' alphabet, Cf the equivalent passage in
Mandeville: Le Livre des merveilles du monde, ed, Deluz, p, 283,
"" e,g. The Defective Version of Mandeville's 'Travels', ed, Seymour, p, xi; Tzanacki, Mandeville's
Medieval Audiences, p. 3, published in 2002 and 2003 respecdvely, and Seymour's review of
Deluz's edidon in M/£, 73 (2004), 132-4,
"" Calendar of Inquisitions Post Mortem, X, no, 118, at pp, 11 if Mandeville tesdfied that
the vicar had written the child's name and date of birth in a psalter that sdU remained
in the church,
"° A John Mandeville committed acts of extordon in Enfield and environs between
 1346 and 1352: TNA, PRO, KB9/66, fol, 23', I owe this reference to D, Pam, History of
Enfield, I: Before iSp: A Parish Near London (Enfield, 1990), a work kindly brought to my
attendon by Professor Caroline Barron,
'" Leiand, Commentarii de scriptoribus Britannici, pp, 366-8, In the later Middle Ages there
were two main manors at Enfield, one the site of the Bohun manor of 'Camelot', and
the other variously known as Elsings or Worcesters, which was held by Sir Thomas Lovell
in the early sixteenth century: W, Robinson, The History and Antiquities of Enfield, in the
County of Middlesex, 2 vols (London, 1823), I, 102-;,
"^ e,g, John Mandeville of Waltham Holy Cross, who may or may not be the same man
as the parker of Enfield, See his bond to Humphrey Bohun, Earl of Hereford, with
the striking declaradon of 'ieo John de MaundeviU', dated at Enfield, 1339, TNA, PRO,
"^ The unique survival in a manuscript associated with Gaston Febus, count of Foix, of
                                     MEDIUM ^ V U M                                   LXXV,2
the celebrated 'musician motet', composed in England by John Aleyn of Edward Ill's
Chapel Royal, provides an interesting illustration of the influence of English court culture
at this time. It has been plausibly argued that the motet was written specifically for the
great celebrations at Windsor around St George's Day, 1358: N, Wilkins, Music in the Age
of Chaucer (2nd edn, Woodbridge, 1980), p, 87, This dating, though, is not universally
accepted: A, Wathey, 'The peace of 1560-1569 and Anglo-French musical relations'. Early
Music History, 9 (1990), ijof,
"'' Bennett, Rediscovery of Mandeville, p. 10;,
"' A point anticipated by Josephine Bennett: ibid,, pp,
                         The Fourth International
                         PIERS PLOWMAN
                                     Conference
     The 4th Intenational "Piers Plowman" Conference wiU take place May 17—19,
     2007 at the University of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia, PA, Plenary lectures
     will be presented by leading scholars in medieval literature and culture, including
     Andy Galloway, Anne Middleton, Alastair Minnis, Wendy Scase, James Simpson,
     D, Vance Smith, and Nicholas Watson, The conference will be diverse and
     wide-ranging, and will reflect the full scope of current Piers Plowman studies,
     "Threads" will include: Genealogy, Context, Textuality, and Belief,
                                      Conference website
         http://www.english.upenn.edu/Conferences/PiersPlownian2007
                              Please address all correspondence to
                             langland@english.upenn.edu
                                              or
                The 4th International "Piers Plowman" Conference,
                       379 Penn Road, Wynnewood, PA, 19096
