Here, There, and In Between: Representing Difference in the Travels of Sir John Mandeville By: Fleck, Andrew, Studies in Philology, 00393738, September 1, 2000, Vol. 97, Issue 4
Database:
MLA International Bibliography
HTML Full Text
HERE, THERE, AND IN BETWEEN: REPRESENTING DIFFERENCE IN THE TRAVELS OF SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE
Contents
LIKE OR UNLIKE: ANCHORING DIFFERENCE
LIKE AND UNLIKE? THE UNSTABLE IN-BETWEEN
THE DIFFERENCE WITHIN
MANDEVILLE'S CONCLUSION
IN 1493, as news of Christopher Columbus's contact with the Americas spread across Europe, Alexander VI penned Inter Caetera Divinae, the bull that divided the round world into Spanish and Portuguese hemispheres. The pope predicated this generous donation on the credibility of assurances that the indigenous people in the newly encountered lands "seem to be well fitted to embrace the Catholic faith ... and there is hope that, were they instructed, the name of the Savior, our Lord Jesus Christ, could be easily introduced into these lands and islands."(n1) Columbus had claimed as much both in his journal and in the widely published and translated letter of 1493. The letter records Columbus's belief in reports of people "born with tails," though he cannot verify them, "hav[ing] so far found no human monstrosities, as many expected."(n2) Since most of the people are not monstrous, Columbus hopes that his masters "will determine upon their conversion to our holy faith, towards which they seem very inclined."(n3) In his journal, Columbus significantly expands these two points; he intends his first words to the uncomprehending natives to be soothing, "because I knew that they were a people to be delivered and converted to our holy faith rather by love than by force."(n4) Throughout his extensive narrative, the admiral records the continually deferred appearance of monstrosities, juxtaposing reports of "men with one eye, and others with dogs' noses who ate men" with his conviction that the people he encountered "would easily be made Christians."(n5) This pattern, with its record of the surprisingly human inhabitants of the New World and its emphasis on their readiness to accept Christianity, recurs throughout the early narratives of European colonialism. What would convince so many Europeans that the people they encountered in the Americas would be so strongly "inclined" and prepared to accept Christianity?

One text that exerted a powerful influence on late medieval and early modern European perceptions of cultural difference was the fourteenth-century Travels of Sir John Mandeville.(n6) This popular text, a synthesis of several other medieval travel and pilgrimage narratives, was translated into every European language and survives in over three hundred manuscripts and numerous printed editions.(n7) In its description of a voyage to the Holy Land and the Far East, an expedition in which the narrator claims that the human cultures he had visited would embrace Christianity if given the proper instruction, this text established a typology for succeeding European representations of non-European peoples. Although several recent studies of the Travels have considered its depiction of the East, none has considered its structuring of these encounters of non-Europeans as proto-Christians, a pattern that exerted great influence on later colonial travel writing.(n8) In his Travels Mandeville represents cultures outside of Europe on a scale of similarity and difference: some cultures are very similar to European culture, others are radically different, and in between are cultures of ambiguous difference. Mandeville's ambivalent response to the points of intersection between these middle cultures and his own prefigures the response of later colonial writers in their encounters with the inhabitants of the New World.(n9)

LIKE OR UNLIKE: ANCHORING DIFFERENCE
The Travels begins as a typical pilgrimage tale. Mandeville promises his audience a tale of exotic travel, listing the many lands he claims to have visited in order to prepare the audience for his stated purpose in writing his text: he has visited lands "where dwell many diverse manners of folk of diverse laws and shapes, of which lands and isles I shall speak more plainly, and I shall devise a part of those things what they are."(n10) This narrative will present the extraordinary people and customs to be seen outside of Europe. Mandeville knows his audience and intends to feed their appetite for the unusual. As the narrative begins, he perfunctorily describes the important sites of Western Christendom to be found on the way to Jerusalem. But after dealing with these familiar places, Mandeville arrives in the Greek Orthodox domains, and there he reaches a sort of dual frontier: geographically, the Greeks stand between Western European culture and the exotic lands occupied by other human beings; narratively, they form a barrier, across which will appear the increasingly strange beings that populate the narrative. His initial response reflects the ambivalence that pervades the narrative: "And if all it be so that the Greeks are Christian, yet they vary from our faith" (13,my emphasis). Here he begins to formulate the paradigm which will complicate his representations of the culturally unfamiliar, non-European "other." For Mandeville, Western Christianity functions as a known, obvious truth against which all other faiths must be compared. In most encounters with unfamiliar peoples, Mandeville will filter the differences in their foreign belief system through the lens of his own, supposedly superior faith. Thus Mandeville notes that the Greeks' beliefs about the origins of the Holy Ghost (13) and their ideas about purgatory, sin, and the proper celebration of Mass (13-14) diverge from Latin Christianity's doctrines.

After his discussion of Greek variations in faith, Mandeville pauses briefly to explain his seemingly detailed presentation of this non-European culture. He justifies himself on the grounds that

if it be so that these things touch not to teaching of the way to the Holy Land, nevertheless they touch that that I have right to show, that is [to] say of the customs and manners and diversities of countries. And for the land of Greece is the next country that varies and is discordant in faith and letters from us and our faith, therefore I have set it here so that ye may wit the diversity between our trowth and theirs; for many men have great liking and comfort to hear speak of strange things. (14,my emphasis)

This is an important decision on the Mandeville's part. He recognizes his audience's desire to hear about exotic people, but the first unfamiliar culture he describes, that of Greek Orthodox Christians, represents a boundary between similarity and difference that makes the distinction between "Europeanness" (the self) and non-Europeans (the other) more than a little hazy. Greek Christians are somewhat the same as Western Christians, but they are also different enough that their strangeness may interest "many men." Francois Hartog has demonstrated that the practice of attempting to distinguish an other, then quickly undercutting that sense of difference, originates in the historiographical technique of Herodotus.(n11) The problem Hartog describes results from the artificiality of setting up a boundary and claiming that truth is only on one side of that frontier, while only error is to be found in the other.(n12) Greek Christians share a border with "true" Latin Christendom. They are the "next country that varies and is discordant in faith and letters from us" and thus pose the problem of being a not-so-distant other that shares at least some similarities with their Western neighbors. Mandeville can thus impose difference on them, whether the Greeks acknowledge such a difference or not. Edward Said recognizes that the imposition of cultural boundaries is an often "arbitrary" process that allows one people to differentiate themselves from another: "It is enough for 'us' to set up these boundaries in our own minds; 'they' become 'they' accordingly, and both their territory and their mentality are designated as different from 'ours.'"(n13) Mandeville makes Greek Christians part of the West's other because they do not fully share in the identity characteristics which he reserves for the medieval European Christian's conception of a culturally similar self. They use a foreign representational system and follow a different faith. They cannot, however, be completely separated from the Western European self because, as Mandeville himself must admit, they "are Christians" (13,my emphasis). Although this ambivalence presents a potential stumbling block, Mandeville imposes his ideas of self and other, beginning with Greeks and extending this distinction to all groups beyond the frontier position that they occupy.

The ambivalence that complicates Mandeville's representation of Greek Christians disappears when he seeks to construct an other that is clearly differentiated from the Western self: all he has to do is to appeal to the audience's knowledge of imaginary, monstrous races. John Block Friedman's useful study of these races traces their appeal from classical writing. Many classical and patristic authors included catalogs of strange men who "were perceived as monstrous because they did not look like Western Europeans or share their cultural norm .... The sense of the alien or 'other' in the marvelous races of the East was so great as to disqualify them, in the Greco-Roman view, from the epithet 'men.'"(n14) Their medieval appeal, as Valerie Flint has shown, was due "partly to mythical projection, partly to observation, partly to the attractions they had for artists, always to the appeal they made to the human imagination."(n15)

Although the first half of the Travels contains several accounts of strange miracles and wonders, it is not until Mandeville ventures past the Holy Land that he encounters the bestial peoples his narrative inherits from Pliny and numerous medieval compendia of marvels. He announces that he will travel beyond the Holy Land because "there are many divers kingdoms and countries and isles toward the east part of the world, wherein are many divers folk and divers kinds of beasts, and many other marvelous things" (102,my emphasis). His interest in encountering strange, marvelous beings draws Mandeville onward; in the second half of the narrative, he intends to make a stronger appeal to his audience's taste for the exotic other. He has not ventured far into his Oriental travels before the first of the monstrous races, the Sciopods, graces his pages. He reminds his audience that in Ethiopia, there "are folk of divers shapes. For there are some who have but a foot; and they will run so fast upon that one foot that it is a wonder to see. And that ilk foot is so mickle that it will cover and ombre all his body for the sun" (113). A few pages later, Mandeville describes the inhabitants of islands near Ceylon and Java. This list, which includes such stock Plinian races as the Troglodytes, Cynocephali, Epiphagi, Panotii, Hippopodes, Hermaphrodites, Cyclopses, and Astomi (137-43), reads like an encyclopedia of alien eastern people. These are the deformed people of legend who bear no resemblance to the everyday people of Mandeville's audience.

After this brief catalog, however, the radically different, monstrous races almost disappear from the narrative and are replaced by extended discussions of more recognizable, human peoples inhabiting India, Tibet, and the rest of Asia. The monstrous races included in the Travels may function like the exotic Oriental spices Mandeville also describes throughout his tale; they provide the narrative with an appealing, unusual taste. Aesthetically, they function as a counterpoint to the human folk in the text. Friedman has suggested that the monstrous races served a philosophical-aesthetic purpose because they were necessary to the divine harmony of the universe. He suggests that St. Augustine's ideas of concordia discors as well as that saint's concerns with "harmonious proportion and the mean" required the monstrous races.(n16) They are included in Christian cosmography because they provide an aesthetic contrast, as a clearly sub-human other, to the reader's sense of self. The readers of the Travels, imagining themselves as occupying the cultural center of the world, require an other at the fringes of their world as a sort of balance to their perception. This may account, in part, for the literal marginalization of the monstrous other "in cosmographies and maps, at the outermost fringes of the known world."(n17) Their fantastically grotesque bodies serve to create "absolute difference between the reader and the subject."(n18) Combined with their inhuman appearance, these monsters' faith in unrecognizable religions also causes them to fall outside the pale of Mandeville's approval. The king of the Cynocephali, for example, leads his people in the worship of an ox (138).(n19) The radical difference that Mandeville creates in his Travels includes the alien races both to fulfill the expectation of marvels and to fully marginalize them.

LIKE AND UNLIKE? THE UNSTABLE IN-BETWEEN
While Greek Orthodox Christians appear almost recognizable and the grotesque forms of the Cynocephali or Astomi are easy to mark as different, the peoples of the East, while exotic, occupy a more ambivalent position in the representational strategies employed in the Travels. Initially, at least, Mandeville ably establishes a cultural difference between the western European subject and each of the human others of the Orient. In a long chapter on the belief system of the Saracens, for example, Mandeville begins by explaining how the Muslims' belief in heaven and hell contains items of faith that are "against our law" (94,my emphasis). In addition, while their sacred writings recognize that Christ was an important person, they deny the truth of aspects central to the Western belief system, including his crucifixion and resurrection: "The Saracens say also, that if Jesu Christ had been crucified, God then had done against his rightwiseness; for to suffer such an innocent die without guilt; and in that they say we err" (95). In India, Mandeville finds people who "are ill-coloured, yellow and green" (116), some of whom "worship the sun instead of God, some the fire, some nedders, some trees, some the first thing they meet at morn, and some worship simulacres, some idols... [including] the ox [which] is the holiest beast' (118). Among the eastern peoples, Mandeville observes many that are given to treachery and cannibalism; he finds cannibalism in the islands near Java (137) and in Dundeya (140). His most detailed description of a cannibalistic people comes when he encounters the Tibetans, who practice a kind of cannibalism to honor dead fathers. There, a priest often "smites off the dead man's head and lays it upon a great platter... [they] hew the [father's] body in small pieces... [and] cast this flesh to [the raptors who hover over the ceremony] .... And the son [boils] his father's head, and the flesh thereof he parts among his special friends, ilk man a little, as a dainty" (218-19). Initially at least, Mandeville depicts the people of these distant lands as a completely alien other, but as we shall see, his efforts to differentiate each of these cultures from his own, based on his extended narrative dealings with them, eventually collapse into a partial recognition of cultural similarities in the midst of diversity.

As much as Mandeville desires to keep rigid cultural and religious differences between the exotic peoples of the East and his own sense of a Western European, Christian identity, his ability to maintain the distinctions meets challenges on a number of levels. The strange religious customs of the other begin to collapse into those of the self. He discovers that the Saracens, for example, are closer to the essential tenets of medieval Christianity than they were originally thought to be, provoking a somewhat ambivalent reaction in Mandeville, who hopes for their redemption while anxiously countering their critique that "we err" about Christ's death and resurrection. He responds to this criticism by declaring that

Nevertheless in that err they. They grant well that all the works of Christ and all his words and his teachings and Evangels are good, and true, and his miracles very and clear; and that the Virgin Mary was a good maiden and holy before the birth of Christ and after also, and unwemmed; and that those who trow perfectly in God shall be safe. And for als mickle as they go thus near our faith in these points and many other, methink that mickle the titter and lightlier they should be converted til our law through preaching and teaching of Christian men. (95,my emphasis)

This is an extremely crucial moment in the text. Defensive as a result of the Muslim charge that Christians defame the one, true God by attributing an injustice to him in the murder of the innocent prophet, Jesus of Nazareth, Mandeville summarizes the points of faith not in contention between Christians and Saracens and concludes that they believe in most of the essential tenets necessary to become Christian and reach salvation.(n20) Although the Muslims he encounters seem different, he recognizes that they are not irredeemably different and could perhaps be brought to accept Christian beliefs.

Mandeville's narrative maneuver in positioning Islam as almost the same as Christianity, requiring only the enlightened teaching of Christian missionaries in order to reach full perfection, is at the crux of most recent studies of Mandeville's attitude towards the peoples of the East. Many of the studies view Mandeville as a tolerant visitor to the Orient and suggest that his relativistic assessment of Muslims, Indians, and other Eastern cultures parallels contemporary theological debates about the "salvation of the infidel."(n21) There is, of course, a historical context for discussing whether non-Christians could be saved. Scholastic philosophy had prepared the ground for this discussion.(n22) James Muldoon finds that the debate continued in the later thirteenth century with Innocent IV's defense of heathen rationality, through which nonbelievers had access first to natural law, and eventually to salvation.(n23) The question of non-Christian salvation entered literary discourse in the early fourteenth century through Dante's Divine Comedy, where some Muslims, such as Saladin, Avicenna, and Averroes, reside in Limbo and avoid the infernal torments assigned to irredeemable Muslims like the founder of Islam, Mohammed, who resides near the bottom of hell and is continually rent in two for his part in creating discord.(n24) In England, literary representations of non-Christian salvation include Piers Plowman, which transmits the story of the Roman emperor, Trajan, who is saved because he adhered to "love and lawfulness and [his] law abiding judgments."(n25) In fact, as Will learns, "Christ called us all, come if we would / Saracens and schismatics and Jews."(n26) This literary context provides the basis for much scholarship on the Travels, which focuses on the supposed relativism and religious toleration Mandeville seems to express in his representation of different religious cultures.

But Mandeville's representational move does not simply express toleration or form part of the Western concern with saving the heathen. After all, one might ask, isn't this explanation of the concept merely a justification for Mandeville's attempt to colonize and incorporate non-Christian religions into his own? Bernard Lewis has shown, for example, that in the medieval Middle East, Europe functioned as the other to the Muslim world. He writes that "the Kafir [infidel] par excellence was thus the Christian, and the countries which in their own self-image constituted Europe were perceived by Muslims as 'the lands of the infidels,' meaning Christendom."(n27) In fact, a few centuries earlier, when their hold in the Middle East had been at its strongest, Muslims might just as effectively have deployed some of the rhetorical maneuvers Mandeville attempts in his narrative against the Christian West. Saladin, for example, could depict zealous Christians to motivate his Muslim forces: "Regard the Franj! Behold with what obstinacy they fight for their religion, while we, the Muslims, show no enthusiasm for waging holy war."(n28) The Muslim knowledge of their Western neighbors included "a sizable body of literature on Christian belief and practices."(n29) The Muslims Mandeville encountered might just as well have been thinking to themselves that Christians "come so near our faith" that they could be easily converted to Islam if given the proper instruction.

But while some critics see Mandeville as a relativist, this English knight is not exactly tolerant of non-Christians. He deems their system of belief imperfect and in need of being brought into accord with Western Christian tenets. Mandeville, the speaking subject, continues the appropriation of indigenous religion with his conclusion that "it seems that the Saracens have many articles of our truth, but it be not perfectly; and therefore it were the lighter to convert them and bring them til our truth" (96-97,my emphasis). While figuring the truth as "ours" might seem to concede the relative nature of truth, in this context Mandeville represents truth as something to be claimed, accessible only through Western Christianity. The hegemonic process continues, as Mandeville, like his contemporaries dealing with the salvation of the heathen, concerns himself less with "toleration" than with conversion to the revealed truth possessed by the West. If, as Stephen Greenblatt suggests, "in the account of the other we principally learn something about the writer of the account," then Mandeville's Travels reveals the hegemonic impulse of pre-colonial Western Christianity.(n30)

The text's Christian narrator has led his audience into a distant, unfamiliar land, among a people whose customs are supposed to be "divers" and exotic. But in this moment of encounter, religious difference between Muslims and Christians begins to collapse under Mandeville's analysis of underlying similarities between the two, calling into question the ability to deploy distinct categories of self and other. He evokes religious and cultural difference between himself and the Saracens, but that distinction recedes as Mandeville points out cultural common ground. The Saracens' remarks about Christianity provoke an anxious denial in Mandeville which surfaces in his attempt to show that Islam is almost the same as Christianity. In one early postcolonial formulation of the impossibility of maintaining the self/other dichotomy, Abdul R. JanMohamed suggests that when "[f]aced with an incomprehensible and multifaceted alterity, the European theoretically has the option of responding to the Other in terms of identity or difference."(n31) In the case of Mandeville's encounter with the Muslim formulation of faith, he eventually chooses to note identity in the other. As JanMohamed suggests, such a choice causes the European subject to "tend to ignore the significant divergences and to judge the Other according to his own cultural values."(n32) This is precisely what Mandeville has done in his version of Islam. He discovers some form of essential sameness which allows him to ignore important differences on issues such as the nature of the Trinity (96). In Islam, Mandeville finds a sort of imperfect version of his own set of truths and accommodates this flawed notion of Islam into his own world view by interpreting it as a corrupt version of a previously familiar object, Christianity. Instead of being judged to be "completely novel or... completely well known," Islam acquires the intermediary status of being a "fraudulent new version of some previous experience,"(n33) and as a result, the potential threat to a stable notion of Western Christianity is neutralized through assimilation. Once the Muslims are understood in this way, they can function satirically by providing a moral example for Christians to emulate. Mandeville's Sultan can thus castigate Christians for not living up to the Christian ideal, blaming their loose morals for the Crusaders' loss of the Holy Land, while appearing to admit that Muslim prophets predict that "Christian men shall recover this land again in time coming, when ye serve your God well and devoutly" (98).(n34) Mandeville can therefore lament that "methought [it a] great shame that the Saracens, which have nowhere right belief ne perfect law, should thus reprove us for our imperfectness, keeping their vain law better than we do the law of Jesu Christ... they are right devout in their law and right true and well keep the commandments of their Alkoran which God sent them" (99). Although they lack the perfection of faith found exclusively in Mandeville's version of Christianity, they could be returned to the Christian fold and can still serve as a model for the Christian reader because of their piety and devotion.

Mandeville's problems with maintaining the difference between self and other continue in new manifestations as he encounters the rest of the non-monstrous races of the East. One of these interpenetrations occurs as he pauses to provide a detailed account of Indian religious practices. Whereas his first reaction had been to condemn them for the strange objects of their devotion--"sun.., fire... nedders... trees ... the first thing they meet at morn" (118)--his discussion of the tenets of their beliefs portrays them as fallen-away Christians whose worship might be reformed to Christian standards. One of the great marvels of India in the Travels is a powerful relic of the apostle and missionary martyr, Saint Thomas, whose "arm, with the hand that he put in our Lord's side after his resurrection, when he said Noli esse incredulus, sed fidelis, lies without in a vessel" (124). The evocation of Christ's commandment to Thomas extends implicitly to the people the apostle had evangelized, but they have now perverted the saint's faith, using his arm to decide civil suits rather than as a testament to the true faith: Indians "come off-times out of far countries thither, for to declare a rightwise cause between party and party, the which is in doubt" (124). The miraculous hand that stands metonymically for faith can determine the truth of any question put before it, but the Indians put the wrong questions to it. Just as this Christian relic's power is diluted by its location in a temple "mickle and fair and full of imagery of their mawmets" (124), so the basic elements of Christian faith are to be faintly observed hidden among the other Indian religious practices Mandeville describes.

Thus it is the Juggernaut to which "men come from far in pilgrimage with great devotion, als commonly als Christian men come to Saint James. And some of them, for the great devotion they have to that mawmet, aye as they go, are looking downward to the earth and will not look about them, for they should see anything that should let their devotion" (124-25,my emphasis). The people of India, whose object of worship is alien and heathen, practice their devotion in a way which must have seemed strangely familiar to the Western Christian reader.(n35) Mandeville goes on to describe the pious processions of Indian pilgrims, some of whom "from they pass out of their homes till they come before their mawmet, at ilk third pace, kneel down upon the earth with great devotion. And they bring with them incense and other things sweet for to thurify that image, as here we do to God's body" (125,my emphasis). The constant references to parallel methods of worship in Christianity further obfuscates the distance between the self and its exotic other. In a slightly different context, Homi Bhabha has termed this mimicry attributed to the colonial subject "the desire for a reformed, recognizable Other, as a subject of a difference that is almost the same; but not quite."(n36) The misguided Indians are to be lauded for their piety while also denigrated for the improper object of their devotion.

Just as in his description of the initially unrecognizable differences of Saracen practice, here Mandeville, through his extended dealings with the culture, claims to find a recognizable structure hidden in Indian devotions that suggests their underlying connection to his version of religious truth. Like the image of St. Thomas, a figure of true faith hidden among the idols of perverted Indian religion, a latent similarity to Christianity can be found within their devotional practices. Mandeville finds that some "for the great devotion they have to that mawmet" seem to "trow that the more pain they suffer here for the love of the mawmet, the more joy in tother world shall have, and the nearer their God shall they be. And sickerly they suffer so mickle pain and martyrdom upon their bodies for love of that ilk mawmet that unnethe will any Christian man suffer half so mickle, ne the tenth part, for the love of our Lord Jesu Christ" (125-26). In this moment, Mandeville's words reveal several things occurring simultaneously. First, these statements strengthen the satirical element of the Travels. Jenny Mezciems states that a text such as Mandeville's Travels "turns the strange into the familiar (new worlds prove identical with the old one).., the model for satire, with its conservative insistence that man cannot escape his own nature by surrounding himself with exotic scenery."(n37) This is a typical reading of the moments in the Travels when the customs of the other are compared with those with which Mandeville's audience would have been more familiar. Yet Mandeville's maneuver involves more than mere satire. It evinces an ambivalent desire both to minimize difference ("they are like us") and to maintain, at the last moment, a semblance of separation ("they are not completely like us"). Mandeville's representation of the religious practice of pilgrims to the Juggernaut thus moves them perilously close to Christianity but keeps them, finally, at a safe enough distance that it is clear that they are not Christians. Thus, for example, the Indians have a very peculiar understanding of the Beatitudes, the demands for various types of temporal suffering by Christians in return for eternal reward, which is at once more Christian than the Christian application of that teaching (Christians would suffer less than "half, ne the tenth part, for love of... Christ"), and yet not quite Christian, since the pain they suffer is for an idol and not for Christ.

A similar problem develops later in the Travels when Mandeville provides an account of the strange customs of the people of Tibet. In his outline of their belief system and the structure of their religious hierarchy, Mandeville mixes horror at their cannibalism with the pleasure of recognition in their cultural structures. In Tibet he finds the Lobossi, who is "the pope of their law," a powerful figure who "gives all the dignities and benefices that belong to their mawmets; and all the priests and ministers of idols are obedient to him as our priests are til our pope" (218,my emphasis). Again Mandeville imagines a kind of mimicry in this exotic people, constructing a parallel but inferior structure to his own culture's practices in the Tibetan religion. Immediately following this simulacrum of Western religion, Mandeville attributes a terrifying religious practice to these people without acknowledging yet another set of structural similarities. In a seemingly inverted show of honor, sons have their dead fathers decapitated, serve their bodies to wild birds, strip the heads bare, serve the head's flesh as "a dainty" and preserve the skulls as a "cup... [from which] he drinks.., all his life time in remembrance of his father' (219). Though Mandeville makes no mention of the strange similarity of parts of this practice, such as the reverence for the father's preserved skull, to Christian reverence for saints' relics, or the Tibetan ceremonial cannibalism compared to the Eucharistic sacrament with its demand that the faithful eat their God's flesh and drink his blood at his own request ("do this in remembrance of me" [Luke 22:19]), such a comparison must have been obvious to Mandeville's readers since it is immediately preceded by an account of the similarities of the church structure of Tibet and forms a distinct narrative unit directly followed by a ten-day journey to a different part of the Khan's empire.(n38)

A cannibalistic ritual serves at this point in the narrative as a kind of mimicking inversion that causes instability in the perception of a distinct self and other at work during this encounter. Stephen Greenblatt finds this incident, and others like it, "a peculiar blend of estrangement and familiarity."(n39) Although George Guzman is not concerned with a discussion of Mandeville's Travels, his study of thirteenth-century accounts of cannibalistic practices does shed some light on this moment in the narrative. He shows that from the time of classical Greece there has been a tradition of associating cannibalism with the unknown or the barbarians. This representational strategy might explain part of Mandeville's impulse to find cannibalism in many of the places he describes. Perhaps more suggestive, however, is another of Guzman's conclusions: "Western writers may also have seen a parallel between Mongol cannibalism and the medieval Christian doctrine of transubstantiation first officially defined in 1216 at Fourth Lateran Council . . . Claims that the Mongols or other oriental peoples practiced cannibalism-especially ritual cannibalism--may have come a little too close for comfort."(n40) The similarity between Tibet's and Europe's ritual flesh-eating thus creates an ambivalent moment of both anxiety and calm in recognizing a nearly-the-same difference. Bhabha may provide a useful explanation for the inclusion of this almost threatening moment in Mandeville's text when he writes that "the success of colonial appropriation depends on a proliferation of inappropriate objects that ensure its strategic failure so that mimicry is at once a resemblance and a menace."(n41) In attributing a cultural practice to the people of Tibet that faultily mimics one of the central events in Western Christianity, a practice that might be corrected by reforming it to match Western practice, Mandeville prepares the way for the colonial impulse which concludes his narrative a few pages later as it anticipates the imperial forces which will get under way a century after his account of his travels.

THE DIFFERENCE WITHIN
One group of people in the Travels who feel the brunt of the hatred often associated with the process of othering is the Jews.(n42) They are marginal figures, appear only in scattered places throughout the text, and are universally characterized in a negative light. This is a curious phenomenon, given Mandeville's typical resort to rhetoric of conversion to Christian truth and redemption. Perhaps, as Stephen Greenblatt persuasively suggests, the Jews seemed to be "a strange people, an other, actually living in their [the Europeans'] midst."(n43) Their actual physical proximity to Western Europe may have accounted for some of Mandeville's discomfort and anti-Semitic attitudes. Mandeville's response to the Jewish presence in his text may thus embody the second part of JanMohamed's theory of possible responses to the other. Instead of responding to another culture in terms of identity or similarity, the European may find only radical difference and refuse all possibility of likeness. JanMohamed writes that if the European "assumes that the other is irremediably different, then he would again turn to the security of his own cultural perspective."(n44) Mandeville figures the Jews as irrecoverably different and may thus have been unable to imagine any redemptive comments to be made about them.

Mandeville's inability to imagine anything positive about the Jews reflects European anti-Semitism, an attitude which enters the narrative almost immediately after the opening of the Travels. The first part of Mandeville's account functions as a supposed medieval pilgrimage narrative. As such, it contains directions to significant relics to be found on the way between England and Jerusalem. Of primary importance to medieval Christians was the True Cross and other items used in the crucifixion of Jesus. Mandeville begins his discussion of relics with the "sponge and reed of which the Jews gave our Lord to drink when he hung upon the Cross" (6), evoking the role of the Jews as Christ-killers who rejected the Messiah when he was among them. The Jews' stubborn rejection of Christian truth may partly account for Mandeville's utter contempt for them.(n45) Reflecting on Jewish malice, Mandeville turns to the composition of the cross, reminding his readers that "of four manners of trees the Jews made Christ's cross for they trowed that he should have been hanging upon that cross as long as the cross might last. And therefore made they the foot of cedar; for cedar may not rot in earth ne in water. For they would that it should have long lasted" (7)- Mandeville figures the Jews as despicable and hateful because they not only helped kill the Son of God but also wanted to prolong his torment for as long as possible. He goes on to point out that the Jews constructed the cross as a sign of their victory over Christ and in order "to have peace when Christ was dead; for they said that he made strife among them" (7-8). What Mandeville does not say here may be as important as the explicit comments he makes as part of his representation of the Jews. For their part in killing Christ, the Jews' hopes for success were inverted, as Christians felt compelled to persecute them for that role, turning their victory into defeat and peace into centuries of strife. In the mid-fourteenth century, most of Mandeville's Europe was an extremely hostile and inhospitable place for Jews.(n46) They were expelled from England just before the beginning of the fourteenth century, then from France in 1306, 1322, and 1394 and from a number of German towns at the beginning of the 1400s.(n47) Mandeville's inability to imagine a positive image of the Jews may thus derive from the prevailing anti-Semitic attitude of self-righteous Christians towards the irremediably different killers of Christ.(n48) These murderers were anti-Christian and could be securely placed as the opposite other to Christians and to the potential Christians Mandeville describes.

Mandeville recirculates a number of negative myths about the Jews in his Travels, possibly as a result of the othering process through which he has put them. The first story Mandeville recounts is the worldwide Jewish plot to poison all Christians by polluting their wells. He discusses some of the vegetative wonders he finds in the islands near Java, including a tree which produces a poison so lethal that only one known remedy exists, and that remedy is itself located uncomfortably far from the unsuspecting peoples of Europe. Mandeville then reveals that it was "[w]ith this venom had the Jews cast on a time for to have poisoned all Christendom, as one of them confessed to me; but, blest be almighty God, they failed of their purpose" (134). Mandeville invokes the anxiety over well-poisonings, a fear which helped justify the anti-Semitic feelings of the fourteenth century. Joshua Trachtenberg provides ample documentation of the widespread fear that the Jews intended to poison most of Christendom and concludes that "[p]opular belief in the possibility of wholesale poisoning was so strong that the rumors of Jewish plots to murder a large part of Christendom, which began to circulate widely in the early fourteenth century, won immediate acceptance."(n49) In recording this story, Mandeville reinforces the anti-Jewish stereotypes available to him. A similar effect is produced in his tale of Gog and Magog. Mandeville tells his audience of Alexander the Great's plan to shut the ten Lost Tribes of the Jews in the Caspian Mountains. Finally, unable to find a way to keep them from escaping, Alexander had appealed to God, and "if all he were a heathen man, God of his special grace heard his prayer and closed the hills sammen, the which are so great and so high that no man may pass them" (184). After taking their God away from the Jews and imagining him responding instead to the heathen Alexander, Mandeville continues the story of the evil Jewish tribes who "in the time of Antichrist... shall come out and do mickle harm to Christian men" (185).(n50) Again, Mandeville participates in promulgating a fear of the Jewish other and plays into the popular belief in the "relation between the Jews and the Antichrist [which] was particularly stressed in these accounts of his career."(n51) Mandeville's Travels, which seems to find something good in each of its human others, thus helping to bridge the gap of difference, is ultimately unwilling or unable to perform this feat for the Jews.

Mandeville's unwillingness to recuperate the Jews confirms the second response to the other developed by JanMohamed: they function as an unregenerate people who occupy an inferior status in relationship to the superior Christian self. Kenneth R. Stowe has amply demonstrated that at times, medieval European Jews functioned as an easy form of the other onto which Christian anxiety about themselves could be displaced.(n52) Although this definite other-function was not always in place, occasionally allowing an ambivalent attitude to develop toward medieval Jews, by the time of Mandeville's Travels the Jews were once again in the position of alterity. Perhaps this clear distance, resulting in radically inferior otherness, operates as a kind of anchor for the Christian self in Mandeville's text. With a differentiated other against which to define this self, the Travels can securely examine the cultural identity of the various distant peoples to be found in the Middle and Far East. Greenblatt offers this as one possibility,(n53) and Stow's study also supports this idea: part of the reason Jews were officially tolerated at various times was that they served as a harmonic balance to the Christian self. The Jew "did not seriously threaten the medieval Christian harmony .... Besides, his presence was necessary. As evil and perversity incarnate--which the Jew was considered to be--his presence sustained the balance--a central concept to medieval thought--between belief and disbelief, reward and punishment."(n54) In the representation of Jewish otherness as always unambiguously different and threatening, Mandeville's Travels thus comes full circle to the radical otherness of the monstrous races.

MANDEVILLE'S CONCLUSION
Confident in his self-identity, Mandeville completes his narrative with a meditation on the need for missionary activity in the East. His tales of mimicry and the always-already penetrated difference between Christians and Saracens, Indians, and Tibetans pave the way for an easy conversion of the Oriental heathens (with the exception of any stubborn Jews there). He tells his readers:

And ye shall understand that in all these lands, realms and nations, out-taken those that are inhabited with unreasonable men, is no folk that ne they hold some article of our belief. If all they be of diverse laws and diverse trowings, they have some good points of our troth. And generally they trow in God that made the world, and him they call the God of kind... But they cannot properly speak of God, and namely of the Trinity, because they have no teaching. They ken not of the Son, ne of the Holy Ghost... [and they receive the advice of] a fiend that answers them and tells them many things, for to deceive them with and for to maintain them in their mawmetry and their error. (221)

By concluding his narrative in this way, Mandeville voices the ambiguity towards the other that pervades his tale. The difference between the Christian West and the heathen East appears to be bridged almost, but not quite. The rational people Mandeville has described possess a rudimentary knowledge of God and some aspects of the "only" true religion. Saracens almost recognize the full importance of Jesus. Indians possess an admirable piety and devotion. Tibetans structure their religion and reverence in a way that almost coincides with the practice of Latin Christians.

It is only a short step from Mandeville's portrayal of these people to the representations that filtered back to Europe following the colonization of the Americas. From Columbus's assurances that the natives of America would "easily be made Christians" to William Strachey's claims that in Virginia, "their priests beings ministers of Sathan (who is very likely visibly conversant amongst them) feare and tremble, lest the knowledge of god and of our Saviour Iesus Christ should be taught in those parts," a search for latent Christianity in the American natives' religious practice structures the first European encounters with America.(n55) Thus Thomas Hariot, an early popularizer of English colonization in Virginia, can describe the similarity of native religious practices to Christianity, can claim that "their priestes... were brought into great doubts" about their misguided practices through contact with Christians, and can promise that "they may in short time bee brought to ciuilitie, and the imbracing of true Religion."(n56) Their knowledge, like that of the cultures Mandeville describes, is imperfect and requires the light of Christianity, or as Mandeville would claim, "the preaching and teaching of Christian men" (95) in order to attain perfection. Backed by Europe's ascendance, Mandeville's hegemonic impulse--the desire to convert the rest of the world to the univocal truth--prepares the way for the imperial appropriation of cultures and peoples inaugurated a century later by Columbus and refined throughout the early modern period.

(n1) Anne Fremantle, The Papal Encyclicals in Their Historical Context (New York: New American Library, 1956), 78.

(n2) Christopher Columbus, "Letter," in The Journal of Christopher Columbus, trans. Cecil Jane (London: Anthony Blond and the Orion Press, 1960), 198, 200.

(n3) Ibid., 197.

(n4) Columbus, Journal, 23.

(n5) Ibid., 52, 24.

(n6) Benjamin Braude, in "The Sons of Noah and the Construction of Ethnic and Geographical Identities in the Medieval and Early Modern Periods," William and Mary Quarterly 54 (1997), claims that the Travels is arguably "the most important single work for the study of the European conception of the Other in the late medieval-early modern period" (115).

(n7) C. W. R. D. Moseley, introduction to The Travels of Sir John Mandeville, trans. C. W. R. D. Moseley (London: Penguin, 1983), 10. This is not the edition of the Travels that I will cite.

(n8) There have been many relatively recent studies of Mandeville's representation of non-Europeans: Mary B. Campbell, The Witness and the Other World: Exotic European Travel Writing, 400-1600 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1988); John Block Friedman, The Monstrous Races in Medieval Art and Thought (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981); Stephen Greenblatt, Marvelous Possessions: The Wonder of the New World (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991); Kim F. Hall, Things of Darkness: Economies of Race and Gender in Early Modern England (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996); Iain Macleod Higgins, "Imagining Christendom and Jerusalem to Paradise: Asia in Mandeville's Travels," in Discovering New Worlds: Essays on Medieval Exploration and Imagination, ed. Scott D. Westrem (New York: Garland, 1991), 91-114, and Writing East: The "Travels' of Sir John Mandeville (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1997); and Donald R. Howard, Writers and Pilgrims: Medieval Pilgrimage Narratives and Their Posterity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980).

(n9) At this point it is necessary to briefly justify the utility of discussing Mandeville without enclosing his name within quotation marks. As Ralph Hanna has observed, the debate over the existence of a real, historical Sir John Mandeville, English knight from St. Albans, "has stimulated the most substantial research on the Travels" ("Mandeville,' in Middle English Prose: A Critical Guide to Major Authors and Genres, ed. A. S. G. Edwards [New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1984], 121). In the 1950s, Malcolm Letts, in the introduction to his edition of the Travels, gave the last gasp of the search for the historical John Mandeville, summarizing the evidence for his existence and concluding that after dying in 1372, he was buried in Liege, France (Mandeville's Travels, Hakluyt Society Reprints, ser. 2, no. 101-2 [London: Hakluyt Society, 1953], xvii-xviii). Recently, scholarship on the Travels has focused more directly on the work, making little mention of the possible problem of authorship. Iain Higgins only briefly touches on the question of the historical author ("Imagining Christendom," 95-96), while Stephen Greenblatt wonders what effect a fictional Mandeville would have on the "spiritual exchange" the tale's narrator initiates (Marvelous Possessions, 33). At this point, then, the fictive nature of the Travels' narrator is widely accepted, and the narrator can be referred to simply as Mandeville, with the assumption that he is a fictional character similar to Gulliver or Crusoe in later travel fiction.

(n10) Mandeville's Travels, ed. Letts, 3-Unless otherwise noted, further parenthetical references to the Travels will be to page numbers from Letts's scholarly edition of the Egerton manuscript. In his Penguin edition of the Travels, Moseley persuasively argues for the Egerton manuscript's superiority for working on Mandeville (Travels of Sir John Mandeville, 38-39). For an opposing view, see Higgins, Writing East, who demonstrates the interesting ways in which the narrative can be read by using multiple editions.

(n11) Francois Hartog, The Mirror of Herodotus: The Representation of the Other in the Writing of History, trans. Janet Lloyd (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), 109.

(n12) Ibid., 111.

(n13) Edward Said, Orientalism (New York: Vintage, 1979), 54. It is important to remember that Mandeville wrote the Travels before the great period of European colonial expansion. It may therefore seem inappropriately ahistorical to use the postcolonial criticism of Bhabha, Said, Spivak, and JanMohamed in opening up discussion of the text. However, the body of contemporary theory about the construction of the other, especially as this criticism engages questions of a culture looking anxiously beyond its familiar bounds, is still useful when it is not specific to events of the truly colonial period. In this case, although Said is interested in colonial texts, his comment still seems applicable to this moment in the Travels, especially given the colonial impulse Mandeville exhibits in the text's final section.

(n14) Friedman, Monstrous Races, 34.

(n15) Valerie I. J. Flint, "Monsters and the Antipodes in the Early Middle Ages and the Enlightenment," Viator 15 (1984): 71.

(n16) Friedman, Monstrous Races, 35. Kenneth R. Stow makes a similar point in his study of medieval Jews, Alienated Minority: The Jews of Medieval Latin Europe (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1992). He suggests that thirteenth-century popes were tolerant of European Jews "because their negative evaluation created for them a niche in the Christian cosmic structure" (270). As I argue below, the Jews also figured as an absolute other.

(n17) Flint, "Monsters and the Antipodes," 71.

(n18) Hall, Things of Darkness, 27.

(n19) In order to support the argument that Mandeville presents the East as a satirical mirror turned against Europe, lain Higgins wrongly argues that Mandeville ecumenically represents the monstrous races as potentially redeemable. For example, Higgins claims that the presentation of the king of the dog-headed race "reveals his great devotion in an almost Christian fashion" (Writing East, 146). However, although Mandeville presents some human races as pseudo-Christian, the truly monstrous races fall outside of salvation for their irrational and wrong-headed beliefs. Thus in the passage describing the dog-headed race, they are marginalized and discounted for their worship of an ox. As we shall see, the humans who inhabit other parts of the world embrace elements of Christianity while the monstrous races do not.

(n20) Although this passage is absent from the Bodleian manuscript (Rawl. D. 99) of the Travels edited by Malcolm Letts, which skips from the description of the substitution of Judas for Jesus on the cross to the Muslim conception of the Trinity, then back to the Muslim declaration that they "trowe in God, that made heuene and erthe and alle thing... that the daie of doom shal come... that alle the werkes that God made, and alle the wordes that he spak... by his holy prophetys... arn verray soth" (455), the Bodleian manuscript does contain the assertion absent in chapter 13 of the Egerton manuscript, that Mandeville will "telle of the bileeve of Sarazeyns that arn cristen in partie" (451,my emphasis), an admission similar to that made about the proximity of Christians and Muslim beliefs already quoted from the Egerton manuscript.

(n21) This is Donald Howard's point when he links Mandeville's technique to a precursor, Ricoldus de Monte Crucis, who first praises the Saracens because "they are prayerful ... revere God's name... and show brotherly love to one another" before he "excoriates their law" and goes about at length "denigrating their claims to prophecies and miracles" (Writers and Pilgrims, 32). More recently, Iain Higgins has claimed that the narrative is a version of a "peculiar religious community" both in its "attempt to relate [other religions] to their counterparts at home" and in its cultural "relativism" which aligns with popular belief that the "radically other... [was] still capable of salvation" ("Imagining Christendom," 93, 98). See also Mary B. Campbell's claim for the narrative's "spirit of toleration" (The Witness and the Other World, 156). Due to the toleration attributed to Mandeville's search for the inner, "natural" religion and virtue, the Travels is moved into the context of thirteenth- and fourteenth-century debates about the "salvation of the infidel."

(n22) Gerard Verbeke traces the patristic and medieval discussion of human dignity in general which culminated in the thirteenth century in a "battle between East and West ... [over] the integrity and freedom of the individual human being." He argues that Aquinas defeated the Eastern philosophy of human dependence, providing a justification for free will and individual responsibility ("A Medieval Debate between East and West about Human Dignity," in Proceedings of the Patristic, Medieval, and Renaissance Conference [Villanova: Augustinian Historical Institute, 1983], 15, 14).

(n23) James Muldoon, "The Nature of the Infidel: The Anthropology of Canon Lawyers," in Discovering New Worlds: Essays on Medieval Exploration and Imagination, ed. Scott D. Westrem, Garland Medieval Casebooks 3 (New York: Garland, 1991), 118. He concludes that papal edicts were highly effective in disseminating the belief in rational infidels, supplanting "the fantastic creatures described by Mandeville... [with] rational creatures... for whom Christ had suffered and died" (122).

(n24) Dante Alighieri, The Divine Comedy of Dante Alighieri, ed. and trans. Robert M. Durling (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), Inferno 4.129, 143-44 and 28.31. Said shows the inconsistency of Dante's entry into the question of saving the infidel, since Mohammed deserves the same treatment as Averroes and the others, who cannot claim ignorance of Christianity as the classical Greeks who share Limbo with them may (Orientalism, 68).

(n25) William Langland, Piers Plowman, trans. E. Talbot Donaldson, ed. Elizabeth D. Kirk and Judith H. Anderson (New York: Norton, 1990), B.11.145.

(n26) Ibid., B.11.119-20. Frank Grady has argued that in the literature of the late fourteenth century, a space is opened by texts like Piers and "Mandeville's Travels... [in which] virtuous pagans speak in voices that we are asked to accept as their own." See his "Piers Plowman, St. Erkenwald, and the Rule of Exceptional Salvations," Yearbook of Langland Studies 6 (1992): 86.

(n27) Bernard Lewis, The Muslim Discovery of Europe (New York: Norton, 1982), 173.

(n28) Amin Maalouf, The Crusades through Arab Eyes, trans. Jon Rothschild (London: Al Saqi, 1984), 1.

(n29) Lewis, Muslim Discovery, 174.

(n30) Greenblatt, Marvelous Possessions, 14.

(n31) Abdul R. Jan Mohamed, "The Economy of Manichean Allegory: The Function of Racial Difference in Colonialist Literature," in "Race," Writing, and Difference, ed. Henry Louis Gates, Jr. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), 83.

(n32) Ibid., 84.

(n33) Said, Orientalism, 58-59.

(n34) It should be noted that no authentic Muslim voice appears in the text; rather, the Sultan's words are Mandeville's creation and serve his purpose. Thus in the Travels, as Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak has elsewhere concluded, "The subaltern cannot speak" ("Can the Subaltern Speak?" in Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture, ed. Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg [Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1988], 308).

(n35) In fact, as Donald Howard writes, "The ideal [European] pilgrim would have traveled, as St. Bernard of Clairvaux is said to have done along the shores of Lake Leman, with his eyes upon the ground to shut out the glories of the world" (Writers and Pilgrims, 24).

(n36) Homi Bhabha, The Location of Culture (London: Routledge, 1994), 86, his emphasis.

(n37) Jenny Mezciems, "'Tis not to divert the Reader': Moral and Literary Determinants in Some Early Travel Narratives," Prose Studies 5 (1982): 3. Donald Howard also begins his analysis of the Travels by recognizing the satiric quality of travel narratives in general: "the traveler compares foreign lands with his own and must stop to think: the circumstance plants the seed of irony and satire" (Writers and Pilgrims, 53).

(n38) Although this part of the narrative is absent from the Bodleian manuscript, it is present in the metrical version of the Travels found in the Coventry Record Office manuscript (M. C. Seymour, ed., The Metrical Version of Mandeville's Travels, Early English Text Society 269 [London: Oxford University Press, 1973]); this is the edition I will cite hereafter for the metrical version. The narrative conflates (intentionally, Seymour suggests [ibid., 129 n. 2767]) the practices of Tibet with the euthanasia practiced in Sumatra, so that before his death, when a father is seriously ill, the son consults with the priests to determine if the father should live or die. If the father is not meant to live, his family "wille hym nyme / And vppon a bere fast bynden hyme" (2802-3) and take him up a mountain, and while he is still living, the "preeste to hym shal gone / And cutte of his heede anone" (2812-13). The killing included in this passage may thus have had an even more direct resonance with the structural similarities of the Eucharist as a ritual sacrifice and cannibalistic ritual.

(n39) Greenblatt, Marvelous Possessions, 44.

(n40) George G. Guzman, "Reports of Mongol Cannibalism in 13th-Century Latin Sources: Oriental Fact or Western Fiction?" in Discovering New Worlds: Essays on Medieval Exploration and Imagination, ed. Scott D. Westrem, Garland Medieval Casebooks 3 (New York: Garland, 1991), 51.

(n41) Bhabha, Location of Culture, 86.

(n42) Jews get very little treatment in most studies of Mandeville's Travels. Greenblatt provides one recent discussion of Mandeville's Jews, but he treats them only briefly in his chapter on the Travels (Marvelous Possessions, 50). Higgins deals more completely with Mandeville's treatment of Jews in Writing East, 178-85.

(n43) Greenblatt, Marvelous Possessions, 50.

(n44) JanMohamed, "Economy of Manichean Allegory," 84.

(n45) Christian hostility toward Jews because of their refusal to accept Christianity is discussed in Robert Chazan, Medieval Stereotypes and Modern Antisemitism (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), 86.

(n46) Christian guilt displaced onto the Jews as hostility is analyzed in Bernard Glassman, Anti-Semitic Stereotypes without Jews: Images of the Jews in England, 1290-1700 (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1975), 17.

(n47) Stowe, Alienated Minority, 6.

(n48) Jews may have been imagined as killers of Christ in the present tense in Mandeville's Europe. As Joshua Trachtenberg reminds us, in the popular imagination Jews were believed to mutilate the transubstantiated Host, "the alleged motive behind these acts being apparently to vent their anti-Christian spleen once more upon the body of Christ" (The Devil and the Jews: The Medieval Conception of the Jews and Its Relation to Modern Antisemitism [New York: Meridian, 1961], 111).

(n49) Trachtenberg, The Devil and the Jews, 101.

(n50) The metrical version of the Travels provides even more anti-Semitic anxiety. It concludes that after escaping their confinement to serve the Antichrist, Gog and Magog "beleueth, bothe more and lasse, / Throuh alle the worlde that thei shal passe / And to hir bileve turne alle mankynde" (2243-45). Beliefs like these figure the Jews as the most significant threat to Western Christianity.

(n51) Trachtenberg, The Devil and the Jews, 35.

(n52) Stowe, Alienated Minority, 235.

(n53) Greenblatt, Marvelous Possessions, 51.

(n54) Stowe, Alienated Minority, 4.

(n55) William Strachey, The Historie of Travel into Virginia Britania (1612), ed. Louis B. Wright and Virginia Freund, Hakluyt Society Reprints, ser. 2, no. 103 (London: Hakluyt Society, 1953), 89.

(n56) Thomas Harlot, A Brief and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia: A Facsimile Edition of the 1588 Quarto (Ann Arbor: The Clements Library Associates, 1951), E3r-E4v, E2r.

~~~~~~~~
By Andrew Fleck, Claremont Graduate University