
 Copyright © 2001 Duke University Press. All rights reserved.
Journal of Medieval and Early Modern Studies 31.1 (2001) 147-164
 	
					
Access provided by The University Of Texas at Austin, General Libraries

[Access article in PDF]
Medieval Travel Writing and the Question of Race

Linda Lomperis
Institute for Research on Women and Gender
Stanford University
Stanford, California

It is tempting to read premodern European travel writing as a body of work that speaks directly to and hence increases our knowledge of the so-called "monstrous races" or cultural "others" of Western Europe in the late Middle Ages. After all, not only do the texts themselves frequently voice their own explicitly descriptive designs, but twentieth-century scholarship has also contributed a great deal to our understanding of their habitations and positionings within the premodern world. 1 In a number of cases, for example, we have come to know much about matters of authorship, social provenance, and circumstances of composition. A number of the surviving manuscripts, moreover, are either glossed, illuminated, or both, thereby providing evidence of contemporary readership and critical reception, as well as a sense of the value these texts may have had for their earliest audiences. 2 And yet, despite the obvious usefulness of this kind of historicist scholarship, it still leaves open the considerable interpretive work needing to be done in order to assess what sorts of functions these travel texts may have had within their original historical settings. The guiding assumption in this essay is that premodern travel narratives deserve to be read not simply as windows onto the world, but rather as documents of critical historical understanding in their own right, as documents, that is to say, which comment critically on the historical conditions out of which they emerged. My intention in what follows is to focus more specifically on processes of critical historical understanding at work in several premodern travel texts, and in so doing, to shed new light on the ruses of both premodern and postmodern racial imagination.

Before looking more carefully at the premodern texts themselves, I would like first to address several questions that specifically pertain to the issue of ethnographic textual interpretation. When a piece of writing explicitly announces itself as an ethnographic account, must we as readers [End Page 147] simply take that text at its word and recognize it as a reliable description of cultural others, or should we instead contemplate the ways in which ethnographies tend to produce the very "others" that they also purport to describe? Must we view ethnographic writing, in other words, as itself a kind of othering practice? And if so, to what extent does the complicated, uncertain end of ethnographic writing, namely, the production of an ethnographic "object" of study, suggest an equally complicated and uncertain situation of beginning, namely, the textual inscription of ethnographic subjectivity? As James Clifford has observed, ethnographic work is necessarily enmeshed in a world of enduring and also changing power inequalities, and it is for this reason that the function of ethnographic writing must be understood as "complex, often ambivalent, [and] potentially counter-hegemonic." 3 Setting forth the cultural text as a speaking subject in its own right, as that which "sees as well as is seen, [that which] evades, argues, [and] probes back," Clifford presents ethnography as a kind of power-laden dance in which observer and observed routinely become confused, and "culture" itself no longer becomes the province of any one figure of control. "Cultures do not hold still to have their pictures taken," Clifford reminds us: errors and errancies are the province of any and all projects of cultural description. Clifford's discussion of ethnographic writing thus urges us to recognize it not as a snapshot account of "others" who stand frozen in time, but rather as a dialogical, in-between space where "many voices clamor for expression," and especially as "an inscription of communicative processes that exist, historically, between subjects in relations of power." 4

Interestingly enough, premodern travel texts provide striking illustrations of a number of these insights. Consider, for example, John of Plano Carpini's thirteenth-century travel account History of the Mongols, in which Plano Carpini describes the inquisitory journey that he made from Italy eastward to the imperial seat of Guyuk Khan, ruler of the vast and powerful Mongol empire. 5 One distinctive feature of this narrative is the considerable attention it devotes to realistic detail. We learn much, for example, about the arduous nature of the journey and about Plano Carpini's own personal reactions to all that he sees and experiences. We are also made privy to the journey's very real and explicitly political purpose, namely, to discern whether or not the Great Khan intends to extend his expansionist designs across the various regions of Western Christendom. In this connection, the narrative as a whole aims to provide a description of the customs, practices, laws, and political dispositions of the Mongol tribes--a description, that is, of the Mongol's explicitly "racial" characteristics. 6 And yet, in large part, [End Page 148] what Plano Carpini's racial description does is simply to cast the Mongols "themselves" as a kind of mirror of his own subjective concerns. Witness, for example, the consistent fascination in this text with issues of gender blurring and with the Mongols' alleged overturning of conventional gender hierarchies (7-8, 17-18). These aspects of Plano Carpini's cultural description shed as much, if not more, light on the Franciscan friar's own convention-bound understanding of gender roles as on the distinctive nature of the Mongols' own forms of gender and gender relations. Also noteworthy in this respect is a chapter in the text entitled "Of their [i.e., the Mongols'] Character, Good and Bad" (14-18), in which the good aspects of "their" character just happen to be strikingly similar to a decidedly Franciscan understanding of good character, namely obedience, respect for community, abstinence, and charity. "Their" bad traits, according to Plano Carpini, resemble, not surprisingly, the seven deadly sins.

Further evidence of the ways in which premodern ethnographic writing does not simply deliver straightforward descriptions of cultural others can be found in what is perhaps the best-known travel text of the period, Marco Polo's Travels. 7 Reading more often than not as a kind of premodern Let's Go Asia, the narrative of Polo's Travels is indeed filled with numerous racial observations. Long passages of the text, for example, are given over to highly detailed descriptions of rulership and community in the lands of the Great Khan and also among the Brahmins in India. Premodern and postmodern readers alike, moreover, have often appreciated the narrative's ostensibly truth-telling aspects, its apparent status, that is, as documentary record of what life was really like in lands east of the Mediterranean in the late thirteenth century. And yet considered from other perspectives, the Travels also clearly outstrips the generic limits of straightforward cultural description. Consider, for example, the numerous, enthusiastically related stories in the Travels about the sexual availability of Eastern women to Western male travelers. More often than not, these vignettes serve to interrupt rather than foster descriptive display through their monotonous inscription of a single orientalist theme, Eastern female sexual availability. Moreover, the text's explicit mention of the usefulness of such sexual information "for a male traveler between the ages of nineteen and twenty-four" cannot help but draw attention as well to the twenty-something male traveler-author himself, Marco Polo. It likewise draws attention to his relationship with his literary collaborator Rustacello da Pisa, coauthors closed off from the rest of the world at the time of their writing, closeted, if you will, within the space of a prison cell (33-34). Descriptions of the sexualized other in the Travels [End Page 149] thus also point away from the other and back to the imagined scene of textual production, namely, male literary collaborators whose enthusiastic (not to say, heated) exchange of sexualized stories about women serves in part to keep alive the erotically charged nature of their own homosocial relationship, despite the fact that the narrative as a whole never directly alludes to such a putatively taboo situation. 8

And yet even in light of these kinds of interpretations, Plano Carpini's History and Polo's Travels can hardly be seen as texts that wholeheartedly disturb conventional ethnographic norms. On the contrary, in fact: geographical imaginings in both of these texts seem to function in the service of these very norms. After all, origins and destinations in both the History and the Travels are straightforwardly delineated: each narrative charts the course of a Westerner who travels to particular places in the East and then travels back home again, more or less retracing the route of the outbound trip. From whence and to where travel occurs both seem quite clear. Polo's Travels, moreover, frequently alludes to the interest other travelers will find in all that the narrator himself sees and does, thereby highlighting the fact that the intended audience of the Travels is none other than a group of non-others, individuals who, like Polo himself, are "at home" in the West, and hence share the same values and interests as the narrator-traveler. Similarly, judgmental comments in Plano Carpini's History--e.g., the narrator's frequent remarks about the Mongols' inordinant reverence for entryways and thresholds, and also about his own intense dislike of the Mongol drink of preference, cosmus (mare's milk)--clearly remind readers of the lines of racial and cultural difference. Categories of "home" and "not home" in both of these narratives, in other words, appear to be stable and clearly set forth: the traveler-narrators here not only know their own desire--know what they do and what they do not like--they also know where in the space of their travels they reach the limit of their desires' satisfaction. They appear to know in all certainty, in other words, where the line of racial otherness begins.

Predictably enough, however, the geographical imaginings that we find in Mandeville's Travels are at once very different and much more complicated. Though the Mandeville-narrator takes great care in specifying at the outset information pertaining to his own identity and social location--"I, John Maundevylle, knyght . . . that was born in Englond, in the town of Seynt Albones . . ." (3)--this narrator also goes on, in the very same sentence, to highlight his status as a traveler who is constantly on the move--specifically, as someone who has "passed thorghout Turkye, Ermonye the lityll [End Page 150] and the grete [Armenia], thorgh Tartarye, Percye [Persia], Surrye, Arabye, Egypt the high and the lowe, thorgh Lybye, Caldee, and a gret partie of Ethiope, thorgh Amazoyne, Inde the lasse and the more a gret partie and thorghout many othere iles" (3). 9 Designating himself, thus, as someone who has literally been everywhere, the narrator also effectively casts himself as a citizen of the world--a traveler with no one fixed place of origin--thereby mystifying his own racial identity even as he inscribes it and unsettling at the outset the generically central categories of "home" and "origin." And just as these categories are disturbed in Mandeville's Travels from the start, so also is a clear-cut understanding of the journey itself. For although there is much initial discussion of Jerusalem as the goal or endpoint of the narrator's journey, as the narrative goes on to unfold, it becomes harder and harder to recognize Jerusalem as anything more than an alleged goal. Certainly the narrator seems to be in no special hurry to get to this extremely important Christian region (we later learn, from his own account, that he in fact took the longest route possible to go there, the one that traverses the Islamic territory of Egypt), and his actual arrival in the Holy Land, moreover, is shown to be an altogether lackluster event, receiving no sort of special textual embellishment and hardly constituting a climactic moment or high point of the narrative. Furthermore, once there, the narrator himself seems to find less interest or pleasure in the place per se than he does in other things, such as the activity of delineating in great detail all the various alternative routes of travel that exist between the Holy Land from western Europe (see 81-84). Arrival at the putative destination is thus characterized by a turning of attention backwards to the point from which one came. Interestingly enough, even the very end of the text does not serve to clarify the geographical coordinates of a final destination. For in concluding the account of his travels, the narrator simply states, "And now I am comen hom mawgree [despite] myself to reste, for gowtes, Artetykes that me distreynen [disable], that deffynen the ende of my labour agenst my will, God knoweth . . . thus takynge solace in my wrechched reste, recordynge the tyme passed" (210). Where precisely the narrator comes to rest remains unclear; all we know for sure at this point is that a situation of road-weariness has heralded the end of the traveling and writing process.

That the beginning and the ending of the journey in Mandeville's Travels should be so vaguely represented is nonetheless not as surprising as may first appear, given the fact that there is an explicit preoccupation in this text with the business of circumnavigating the world. Two-thirds of the way into his account the Mandeville-narrator devotes a whole chapter to this [End Page 151] topic, and one remembers, of course, that it is largely due to this particular narrative concern that Columbus himself took a copy of Mandeville's Travels on his first voyage to the New World. 10 Circumnavigation, however, is much more than merely an important theme in this text; it is also another name for the text's structural make-up and readerly effects, highlighting as it does the many circularities and round-about turns of the narrative itself. Certainly the experience of reading Mandeville's Travels can be accurately characterized as one which produces a sense of going around and around. No sooner does the narrator approach the entry point proper to Jerusalem, for example, than he moves into a long, ostensibly digressive discussion of the customs, practices, and sights to be seen in Egypt, the realm controlled by the Sultan of Babylon. The journey toward the Christian center of the world thus takes a decidedly asymptotic turn, never quite concluding at the place to which it ostensibly was heading. All throughout this narrative, moreover, the experience of going to a manifestly new place tends to represent itself, paradoxically enough, as an experience of turning back once again to an old place, a place where one has already been. The flesh-mortifying worshippers of the Juggernaut, for example, "taken ensence [incense] and other aromatyk thinges of noble smell. and sensen the ydole as we wolde don here Goddes preciouse body" (116, my emphasis). The Juggernaut worshippers' manifestly non-Christian practice of human sacrifice, moreover, appears to have an extremely Christian outcome: after a worshipper kills himself for love of the idol, his friends "brennen [burn] the body and thonne everych [every one] of his frendes taken a quantyte of the assches and kepen hem in stede of [in place of] relykes and seyn that it is holy thing" (118, my emphasis). Going to the realm of the "foreign" and "other" is thus uncannily like returning home to Latin Christendom. The "new," the "strange," and the "exotic" in Mandeville's Travels keep turning our attention around to that which is familiar and vice versa as well. For the "familiar" in this text is also shown to be part and parcel of the "exotic." The ostensibly homely territory of the Holy Land is also, in its own way, a place that is extremely "other." It is a place, after all, that is entirely strewn with body parts--the head of St. Katherine here, the finger of St. Thomas there--and hence it is a place that is very much akin to the explicitly non-Christian communities of the East where practices of bodily fragmentation and cannibalism are everywhere apparent. No matter where one goes in Mandeville's Travels, one always seems to travel in a circle back to the place from which one started. The journey out, the journey away from home is circularly linked to the journey back, the journey toward home, providing [End Page 152] in this regard an excellent verbal counterpart to conventional premodern visual representations of circumnavigation.

Circumnavigation, however, is not the only term appropriate for characterizing the Travels' thematic and structural singularities. Pleasure, I would suggest, is indeed the other important term in this equation, since the Mandeville text is certainly nothing less than a narrative that explicitly aims to provide pleasure. As the narrator states at the very beginning, "men covet to hear the Holy Land spoken about and diverse countries thereabout and [they] have of that great pleasure and enjoyment" (44); and the narrative of travel that the narrator goes on to give unmistakably delivers the pleasure-inducing descriptions that its audience allegedly wants. One can certainly discern, moreover, that Mandeville's Travels did indeed serve as pleasurable reading for a wide body of the premodern literate community, given the fact of its far-flung existence in some three hundred manuscript copies. These facts alone, however, do not help to specify the precise kind or kinds of pleasure that the Travels might have provided--both then and now--to its readership. And so the questions I would like to address in the rest of this essay pertain precisely to this issue. What kind of pleasure did Mandeville's text propose for its premodern readers, and how and why, of course, should it be possible to discern something of the traces and terms of this pleasure from the vantage point of the late twentieth century? What, in other words, is the pleasure that is at stake for both writer and reader in a text that is at one and the same time utterly realistic and completely fantastic? And how, of course, might an understanding of the text's pleasure-inducing aspects affect our understanding of its overall racial imaginary?

At the risk of effacing the specificity of each of these questions, let me take this opportunity to advance a particular hypothesis as a means of provoking further analysis. The pleasure that Mandeville's Travels offers, I submit, is precisely the pleasure that derives from situations of "passing." What exactly do I mean here by the notion of "passing"? On the most general level, "passing" refers to the act of assuming a new or otherwise nonnatural identity in such a way as to suggest to outside observers that this new identity is in no way feigned or fictional, but rather natural and true. Someone who "passes" is someone who plays a part so well that he or she effectively becomes the part, someone, in other words, who, Hamlet-like, renders as natural that which is merely performance. Notions of theatricality are obviously pertinent here since passing is always a kind of spectacle, an eminently spectacular event. Passing, that is to say, always involves the act of witnessing, always involves the affirmation or judgment of some knowing [End Page 153] audience, an audience which, in point of fact, should indeed know better, because its knowledge and/or social positioning should enable it to see through--i.e., discern the unnaturalness or falsity of--the performance at hand. If, for example, men successfully pass as women, or women as men, or whites as blacks, or blacks as whites, they do so only because others witness and believe in the truth or naturalness of their performances.

But to understand the notion of passing along the lines of theatricality and spectatorship also means contemplating further the complexities that belong to these territories. Carole-Anne Tyler's observations about passing are especially relevant in this regard: "The mark of passing successfully," Tyler writes, "is the lack of a mark of passing, the lack of a signifier of some difference from what one seems to be. Passing, therefore, can only name the very failure of passing, an indication of a certain contradiction at its heart, an indication of the contradictions which constitute it." 11 In its specific insistence on lack, Tyler's statement highlights not only the issue of constitutive contradiction involved in all acts of passing--namely, in order to pass successfully, one needs, paradoxically, to appear to be failing to pass at all--but also the way in which acts of passing always involve the issue of what I would call "closeted difference": a difference, that is to say, that is simultaneously there and not there, apparent but at the same time not apparent at all, a difference that is somehow caught between the deceptiveness of mimicry and the straightforwardness of "coming out," without being simply reducible to one or the other. Underlining once again matters of contradiction, we might say that passing is an activity that is visibly committed to the production of its own invisibility. And it is indeed this sense of invisibility as the paradoxical partner of the very visibility of passing that allies passing with the performative identity structure that belongs to the figure Homi Bhabha calls "mimic man," the colonial subject who strives to become the colonizer through assimilation, but who nonetheless remains, in the eyes of the colonizer Other, "not quite not white." 12 The double negative of this phrase is akin to Tyler's sense of lack and failure as the necessary terms of success in passing: just as the one who passes succeeds only when the act of passing has been understood to fail, so does the mimicry of the colonized subject succeed only as a decidedly failed effort, simultaneously hailing the colonized subject into place and calling her or him into question. For Bhabha, the activity of "mimic man" is both constant and constantly imperfect; it is, in short, a (su)stained imitation that leaves him necessarily and perpetually outside of "him"/"self" and at the same time, outside of the realm of the Other: in short, "not quite not white." [End Page 154]

How might these observations bear on our assessment of questions of racial representation in Mandeville's Travels? Who exactly in this text can we identify as engaging in the act of passing? The answer to this last question seems clear enough: just about everyone. For at first glance at least, there seems to be not one single figure nor one single racial grouping in this text who does not deserve to be seen according to the logic of passing. Indeed, what is striking and distinctive in Mandeville's Travels is the way in which racial identities are repeatedly shown to be (su)stained imitations, performances, that is to say, which display themselves as such and hence encourage our recognition of them as visible investments in the theatricalized modality of passing. Let us consider in this regard one of the primary racial representations in this text, the representation of Latin Christendom. Twentieth-century readers of the Travels, it seems, have universally accepted the solidity of this identity category, and their ceaseless insistence on the Travels' overall Christian concerns has served to secure Christianity itself as the text's unquestionably firm ideological foundation. And yet, what we see when we look at the Christians represented in the Travels is that they clearly appear as "not quite not Christians." For as the Egyptian Sultan points out to the narrator in the dead center of the book, European Christians merely pass as Christians, and they do not do a very good job of it at that: they transgress their own laws, they are swollen with pride and vainglory, and their priests are poor practitioners of the faith (88-90). European Christians are shown by the Travels to be "Christians" in name only, not at all as embodiments of some sort of essential Christian identity. Indeed, the rest of the text strongly suggests that there is no such thing as essential or authentic Christian identity insofar as all sorts of "others" in this text can and do indeed effectively pass as Christian. Witness, for example, the pious half-man/half-goat that the narrator encounters in the deserts of Egypt. And witness, of course, all of the so-called virtuous pagans in this text, many of whom, though manifestly not Christian, strike one nonetheless as more Christian than the so-called real Christians. These "others," in other words, are themselves, "not quite not other" insofar as the very mark of their otherness is at one and the same time the mark of their non-otherness. Consider in this regard the narrator's description in chapter 35 of the honor done by a pagan son to his dead father. To be sure, the honorable practices described here are unquestionably "other," for they amount to nothing less than cannibalism pure and simple. The son, we learn, boils his father's head and then distributes little bits of the boiled flesh among his special friends "in stede of entremess or a sukkarke [as the equivalent of a special dish or [End Page 155] extra course]" (206). And yet, this manifestly non-Christian, cannibalistic practice also seems to be merely passing itself off as such, for it also stands quite clearly as a dim replica and a near miss of eucharistic veneration. The son's convening of his special friends for the purpose of engaging in a ritualized meal obviously recalls Christ's Last Supper with the apostles, and the son's practice of making a cup out of his father's skull and then drinking from it all the rest of his lifetime "in remembrance of his fadir" (206) is cast in unmistakably eucharistic terms. Thus, as this textual vignette makes clear, "others" can certainly pass as Christians just as Christians themselves, as we have already seen, have the capacity to pass effectively as "others." Neither of these identity categories in the Travels is stable or entirely separate one from the other. And in this respect what the text as a whole suggests is a radically nonfoundational understanding of identity: "Christianity" and "Non-Christian otherness" are both shown to be precisely that which one cannot grasp, nothing more, in short, than mere passing performances.

What, then, can be said of the narrator's own identity? Though the narrator initially introduces himself as a Christian knight, "Sir John Mandeville," there is also considerable reason to regard him, in the final analysis, as both "not quite not a Christian" and "not quite not a knight." The Christian fervor he expresses quite amply at the very beginning of the narrative seems at best to be of questionable sincerity, given the fact that it appears to be entirely absent once the narrator enters the service of the Sultan of Babylon. Indeed, far from trying to persuade the Sultan to convert to Christianity, the Mandeville-narrator winds up not only detailing the distinguishing traits of Islam at the center of his own narrative, but also explicitly agreeing with the Sultan's own harsh critique of Latin Christendom (87-92). As for the narrator's knightly behavior, that too seems to be finally little more than mere passing performance, albeit one that the narrator accomplishes for the most part quite effectively. He speaks amply and enthusiastically, after all, about his having borne arms for both the Sultan of Babylon and the Great Khan, and his knightly exhortations calling for Christian repossession of the Holy Land are entirely believable not only in terms of his own self-styled warrior status, but also in terms of the actual historical realities of fourteenth-century European crusading. 13

And yet the narrator's own knightly self-portrayal also cannot be taken simply at face value, for alongside of this manifestly phallic posturing we must reckon with an equally manifest textual display of the narrator's decidedly nonphallic posturing, his reticence, that is, to engage in acts of penetration. So much is suggested, for example, by the considerable emphasis [End Page 156] given in the text to the anxiety that the narrator and his fellow travelers display in their crossing--i.e., penetrating--of the Vale Perilous. It is hard not to see this anxiety in specifically sexual terms insofar as this scene of geographical penetration is immediately followed by a reference to the perils of heterosexual penetration: just beyond the Vale Perilous the narrator describes a race distinguished by its women who have snakes inside their bodies "that stongen men upon hire yerdes [penises]" (190). References elsewhere in the text also allude to the dangers of heterosexuality. The story of the death-dealing love of Hippocras's daughter and the story of necrophilia that immediately follows it (14-17) both represent heterosexuality as a potentially murderous and socially destructive activity. Heterosexual penetration, in any case, does not seem to be a high priority for the Mandeville-narrator: when offered the possibility by the Sultan of wedding "a great prince's daughter," the narrator, in laconic, Bartelby-like fashion, simply declines: "I had no will to don it" (21) is all that he says. The abbreviated nature of this response, as well as the wider context in which it occurs, make it impossible to discern its precise motivation, whether, for example, it is has to do with a certain sexual reticence on the narrator's part or with his Christian religious scruples or with both or with neither.

Nevertheless, the rejection here of miscegenation is certainly worth insisting upon, not only because it remains so fundamentally unexplained within the text, but also because it points, I believe, to a wider, more pervasive pattern of racial representation throughout the text. The Mandeville-narrator, as we see here, could have married a princess from the Sultan's retinue and thereby, presumably, could have remained forever in the service of a lord whom he manifestly admires and enjoys serving, and yet he doesn't. Likewise, the narrator could have established permanent residency in the household of the Great Khan, another lord whom he greatly admires and manifestly enjoys serving, but he doesn't do that either. Indeed, the narrative as a whole leads us to surmise that the narrator could have stopped and established himself permanently in any number of the places he visits. He certainly might have done so in particular in the Christian community of Prester John, which would have offered him at the very least an explicitly Christian haven at the very point of his travels when he finds himself most removed from the spaces of Latin Christendom. And yet he doesn't do this either.

For all its critically acclaimed ideology of tolerance, all its manifest investments in both the embracing and excusing of racial and cultural differences, Mandeville's Travels presents itself as a narrative in which the narrator [End Page 157] consistently foregoes the opportunity to relinquish his own identity so as to "go native," something which would seem logical for him to do, after all, given the level of attachment and admiration that he displays for a number of the racial others that he visits. What is apparent is that the narrator's desire is not for permanence and stability, but rather for impermanence and instability. His pleasure seems to come not from situations of fixed identity and stable residency, but rather from situations of passing and indeed, from situations of "passing through": from situations, in other words, of never remaining in any one place or in any one racial identity for very long.

There are several possible ways of apprehending the stakes of these kinds of representations of race, identity, and pleasure in Mandeville's Travels. To begin, let us look again at one of the defining features of the phenomenon of passing, the sense that passing always occupies some sort of middle ground between deceptive mimicry and straightforward coming out. Passing in this regard becomes a way of representing closeted pleasure, pleasure which never achieves any sort of literal expression, but which instead casts a shadow and leaves legible traces. The term closet, I believe, is especially useful in a critical analysis of Mandeville's Travels, which is a text that not only displays considerable fascination with spaces of privacy and intimacy, but also gives way to numerous hints of homoerotism. In this connection, let us note the way in which the text is structured not so much as a linear journey but more so as a sequential display of the narrator's zealous and indeed quite intimate relationship with three powerful men: the Sultan of Babylon, the Great Khan, and Prester John.

The relationship that the narrator maintains with each of these figures clearly plays out the textbook definition of homosocial insofar as each relationship is characterized by attachments that are at once same-sex based, powerfully strong, and manifestly nonsexual. But precisely in their very status as textbook homosociality, these relationships also display their place on a continuum with the homoerotic. Witness, for example, the scene described in chapter 16 where the narrator and the Sultan adjourn to the latter's bedroom for a private chat. Although this bedroom conversation contains no explicit sexual content, it nonetheless takes place in circumstances that cannot entirely be divorced from sexual, bodily considerations. For what we see in this episode with the Sultan, and also in the subsequent episodes with the Great Khan and with Prester John, are situations of bodily confusions. For in all three of these instances, not only does the narrator himself pass as a member of the other race (in the Prester John episode, for example, the narrrator writes himself covertly into the priest's own family [End Page 158] history), but so do all the racial "others" themselves also pass as members of the race of Christians. The Sultan of Babylon, the narrator tells us after the bedroom chat, speaks more knowledgeably about Christianity than any "real Christian" ever could; he is, as it were, more Christian than the Christians are. The Great Khan is shown to be a devout, Christ-like figure, someone who not only speaks in parables before he dies (i.e., the parable of the arrow breaking that he delivers to his sons), but also someone who turns out to be the progenitor of a race of Mongol Christians (!). Priest-like, though decidedly not part of Latin Christendom and related by marriage to this race of Mongol Christians, Prester John is shown by the narrator to be the practitioner of a certain non-Roman Catholic form of "no-frills" Christianity: he regularly carries with him, we are told, "but o cros of tree [only a cross of wood] withouten peynture and withouten gold or silver or precious stones in remembrance that Ihesu Crist suffred deth upon a cros of tree" (182-83). In all three scenes, in other words, bodies of Christians and bodies of non-Christians are intimately fused and con/fused. In each, we might say, the narrator's male Christian body literally--and quite unmistakeably sexually, I would add--"passes into" the body of a male non-Christian "other," thereby making visible on a structural level what remains closeted and indeed unspoken on the narrative's literal level. Passing in these instances thus becomes both vehicle and accomplishment of the pleasures of male homoerotism, thereby establishing Mandeville's Travels as a significant, albeit closeted, representation of the premodern homoerotic imaginary. 14

It would be inaccurate, though, to equate these hints of male homoeroticism in the Travels with some kind of wider textual investment in animosity toward women in general or femininity per se. Whatever animosity toward women there may be in this text seems to amount neither to wholesale gynophobia nor to misogyny pure and simple; rather, it seems to me to be a byproduct, as it were, of the various negative representations of heterosexuality included in this text. As we have already had occasion to see, heterosexuality in the Travels is often cast in the mode of violence or danger, and the harm that these modes imply does not simply accrue to men. Women too potentially suffer under heterosexuality, as witnessed by the Mandeville-narrator's repeated mention of the practice in certain races of burying a wife who is still alive with her already-dead husband. Heterosexuality in these instances can only be seen as a kind of "living death." What, then, are we to make of the narrator's description of the Amazons in chapter 18? By definition, of course, Amazons are "women's women" and as the Mandeville-narrator describes them, they certainly appear to be no more [End Page 159] unusual and no more noteworthy than any of the other "others" the narrator encounters in the course of his travels. Not at all, that is to say, does the narrator stigmatize them or suggest that they are somehow worthy of censure simply because they are women. Far from it, in fact, for in one important respect the narrator and the Amazons, ironically enough, appear to resemble each other: both are consummate figures of passing. Not surprisingly the text of the Travels delineates the Amazons as women who successfully pass as men, which corresponds remarkably to premodern lesbian identities. So striking, in fact, is this description of the Amazons as women who play the part of men that one cannot also help but wonder: might the Mandeville-narrator "himself" have been just one such figure, a woman who has successfully passed as a world traveler, a "man about town," a "Man de ville"? This is certainly worth thinking about, it seems to me, given the fact that display of authorial identity in many premodern texts often engages word play of one sort or another, and also given the fact that the precise historical identity of "Sir John Mandeville" remains to this very day a mystery.

The second way we might think about questions of passing in this text is by using it as a way of talking about the text's overall preoccupation with matters of identity. To recognize Mandeville's Travels as a text that points to questions of the fluidity and instability of identity constructs is, in one sense, not especially surprising; many other premodern texts demonstrate similar preoccupations. But in the Travels the urgency surrounding these matters seems to be greater than what we find elsewhere. Throughout the text there are numerous calls sent out both for the mobilization of old identities and the reconstruction of new identities; the order of the day in the Travels seems to be the sociopolitical need for identity resignification. Time and again the text refers to the fact that Christians need to become something else, either better Christians or a different kind of Christian, so that they can successfully undertake the repossession of the Holy Land. And the text also constantly shows us, in the form of the virtuous pagans, possible evolutions (or devolutions) in Christian identity, that is to say, new forms of Christian identification and new forms of Christian self-understanding. And insofar as there is no simple or essential Christian identity displayed in the entire narrative, Mandeville's Travels can be said to amplify and set in relief, through its insistence on questions of passing, something of the actual fluctuations of identity at work in the premodern world system. For as Janet Abu-Lughod has observed, the fourteenth century is precisely a moment in history when the interlocking economic systems of the world were engaged in transitional processes that would issue eventually in European [End Page 160] hegemony. Prior to this, as Abu-Lughod argues, there existed no specific or fixed geopolitical space known as "Europe," and hence there also existed no fixed sense of European cultural or social identity. 15 Europe and European Christianity in the fourteenth century were in the midst of a period of flux and were themselves only beginning to take on the identity configurations that they would assume in the next, early modern phase of the world system. Mandeville's Travels with its manifest investments in acts of passing through various different racial identity configurations, can be said therefore to bear witness to all this, and indeed can be said as well to participate in these sorts of historical repositionings.

A third and final way we might understand questions of passing in the Travels is in terms of what they tell us about the text's status as a kind of Christian, colonialist fantasy. For as Mandeville's Travels as a whole demonstrates, all the world is quite literally a stage for Christianity, insofar as everyone in this text seemingly has the potential to pass as a Christian. It is especially notable in this regard that figures of political power--i.e., the Brahmins in India, the Great Khan, and the Sultan of Babylon--are precisely those figures who pass most effectively and most prominently as Christians. In this respect, the Travels can be said to encode a kind of wishful political scenario whereby Christians and Christianity are shown to be dominant throughout the world, this being, of course, nothing more than a purely wishful and indeed willful representation, given the fact that it runs counter to world history such as we know it in the late fourteenth century. At that time, Islam, not Christianity, held sway throughout the world, including in its fold not only peoples who inhabited the spaces surrounding the Mediterranean (especially the Middle East and Spain), but also numerous tribal communities all across Northern and sub-Saharan Africa, racial groupings (some very powerful, e.g., the empire of Mali) that had progressively become converts to Islam over the course of the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries. 16 Furthermore, not only did the Mongols, who conquered Islamic territories in the Middle East in the mid-thirteenth century, wind up themselves converting to Islam and not to Chrisitanity (during the reign of the Il-Khans), but also once Christian Jerusalem fell under Moslem control in 1291, Latin Christendom never effectively recouped its losses, never again constituted itself as a significant power base in that entire region of the world. Thus, the reference in the Travels to the lineage of the Great Khan and this people's eventual conversion to Christianity must be understood as nothing less than pure fantasy. The text of Mandeville's Travels, however, with the sense that it conveys of a world entirely filled with Christians [End Page 161] and others wishing to be Christian, can be understood as a significant testament to the power and longevity of this fantasy within the imagination of Latin Christendom.

Not everyone residing within this religious setting, however, must have shared this fantasy and certainly not everyone in the premodern world can be said to be included in it. To state that every race represented in Mandeville's Travels can and does pass as Christian would not be entirely accurate, for the Jews represented in this text clearly do not. They are indeed the only racial grouping in the narrative that does not pass at all, that only remains itself, and they are also the only racial grouping that the narrator himself consistently passes judgment on, consistently passing the Jews into the realm of the hated and the reviled, the realm, that is, of the absolute "other." In this respect, then, Jews that appear in this text remain as they did in point of fact in fourteenth-century Latin Christendom, the one race that was not readily or actively repurchased into the Christian racial fold. Mandeville's Travels can thus be said to stand as one more demonstration of the way in which European Christian identity tried to establish its own coherence and stability largely at the expense of the Jews, who are relegated to a position of social marginality, contained and sustained in a fantasmatic identity construct determined by the binary opposition between Christians and Jews. There is indeed a strong desire encoded in this text to keep the Jews entirely separate from all other racial groupings, as witnessed by the narrator's inclusion of the story of the Jews of the Ten Lost Tribes, Gog and Magog, who are entirely held at bay from the rest of the world in the impenetrable hills beyond the land of Cathay (cf. chap. 30).

In neglecting to point out the way in which Jews are the only race in the Travels that seems to be wholly barred from passing as Christians, we as critics fail to recognize the complicity of our own critical gestures in the very passing acts that we identify: for in making critical judgments as to which identities, which races, or which sexualities do or do not pass in this or in any text, we inevitably instantiate a politics of critical vision, providing a kind of intellectual window, as it were, through which some identities will pass and will be seen while others will remain occluded and entirely passed over. Certainly Mandeville's Travels, with all of its many preoccupations with passing, is a text that finally demands that we as readers be conscious of our own position and agency within this kind of representational theatricality. 17 Our stance as readers necessarily becomes more of an ethical position, one which carries with it the responsibility of recognizing the significant part that we play in constructing identities, passing through some, passing [End Page 162] over others, and passing yet others into realms of significance that are themselves endowed with more or less sociopolitical agency. 18 From this recognition, it seems to me, emerges the strong tendency to stop seeing "Mandeville" and the society that produced "him" as entities that are purely and simply "Christian" (or purely and simply "male" or purely and simply "European"), and to undertake instead an investigation into how the homogenizing category "purely and simply x" got produced in the first place. To do any less would be, on the one hand, to deny the prevalence of the "not quite not . . ." structure of identity throughout this text, and on the other hand, to ignore questions of historical violence that are always at stake in matters having to do with any kind of clear-cut identity production. 19



Notes

1. For accounts of medieval European contact with, and representation of, non-Europeans, see Christopher Dawson, Mission to Asia (London: Sheed and Ward, 1955); Mary B. Campbell, The Witness and the Other World: Exotic European Travel Writing, 400-1600 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1988); and Iain Macleod Higgins, Writing East: The "Travels" of Sir John Mandeville (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1997). J. R. S. Phillips, The Medieval Expansion of Europe (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988); and Janet L. Abu-Lughod, Before European Hegemony: The World System, a.d. 1250-1350 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989), also make some relevant observations about these matters, especially in relation to The Travels of Marco Polo.

2. In this regard, see especially Josephine Waters Bennett, The Rediscovery of Sir John Mandeville (New York: Modern Language Association, 1954); and Rudolph Wittkower, "Marvels of the East" and "Marco Polo and the Pictorial Tradition of the Marvels of the East," reprinted in Allegory and the Migration of Symbols (1977; repr. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1987), 45-74, 75-92.

3. See James Clifford, "Introduction: Partial Truths," in Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography, ed. James Clifford and George E. Marcus (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986), 1-26, quotation at 9.

4. Ibid., 14, 10, and 15 respectively.

5. A translation is reprinted in Dawson, Mission to Asia, 3-72.

6. Here I am drawing on Robert Bartlett's understanding of the definition of race in a premodern context: uncoupling the notion of "race" from its modern and postmodern associations with skin color, Bartlett defines "race" in the Middle Ages in terms of the "customs, language, and laws" of a particular social grouping, these being, according to Bartlett, "the primary badges of ethnicity." See The Making of Europe: Conquest, Colonization, and Cultural Change, 950-1350 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993), 197-242.

7. The Travels of Marco Polo, trans. Ronald Latham (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1958), cited hereafter in the text.

8. My remarks here are indebted to Wayne Koestenbaum, Double Talk: The Erotics of Male Literary Collaboration (New York: Routledge, 1989), who has argued that all acts of literary collaboration involve "a sublimation of erotic entanglement. . . . [A] writer turns to a partner not from a practical assessment of advantages, but from a superstitious hope, a longing for replenishment and union that invites baroquely sexual interpretation" (4). These comments, to my mind, offer a suggestive vantage point from which to reassess the Marco Polo-Rustacello da Pisa collaboration, an authorial alliance that scholars usually do not analyze. A more comprehensive interpretive "queering" of the Travels as a whole, though interesting to contemplate, lies beyond the scope of this study.

9. All citations are to Mandeville's Travels, ed. P. Hamelius, vol. 1, EETS o.s. 153 (London: Oxford University Press, 1919); this is the Cotton text.

10. Valerie I. J. Flint surveys the place of Mandeville in Columbus's enterprise, in The Imaginative Landscape of Christopher Columbus (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992), 99-104, 141-42, 170-80.

11. See Carole-Anne Tyler, "Passing: Narcissism, Identity, and Difference," differences 6 (1994): 212-48, quotation at 215-16.

12. Homi Bhabha, "Of Mimicry and Man: The Ambivalence of Colonial Discourse," October 28 (1984): 125-33, at 131.

13. For the crusading mentality in England, see J. J. N. Palmer, England, France, and Christendom, 1377-1399 (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1972), 181-91.

14. A number of scholars have addressed the possibilities and limits of homosocial relations: see John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980); Christopher Baswell, "Men in the Roman d'Eneas: The Construction of Empire," in Medieval Masculinities, ed. Clare A. Lees (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1994), 148-68; and several of the essays collected in Premodern Sexualities, ed. Louise Fradenburg and Carla Freccero (New York: Routledge, 1996).

15. Abu-Lughod, Before European Hegemony, 352-73.

16. See the general accounts of Phillips, The Medieval Expansion of Europe; and Abu-Lughod, Before European Hegemony.

17. See, in this connection, Tyler's argument that audiences always enact the passing of the others' identities ("Passing," 239-42).

18. See Syed Manzurul Islam, The Ethics of Travel: From Marco Polo to Kafka (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1996).

19. See Judith Butler, Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of "Sex" (New York: Routledge, 1993).

						
 