The Metamorphoses of Sir John Mandeville
Author(s): C. W. R. D. Moseley
Source: The Yearbook of English Studies, Vol. 4 (1974), pp. 5-25
Published by: Modern Humanities Research Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3506677
Accessed: 16/04/2010 11:02
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=mhra.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
                 Modern Humanities Research Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
                 to The Yearbook of English Studies.
http://www.jstor.org
        The Metamorphoses of Sir John Mandeville
Many new and recast versions of Mandeville's            Travelsappeared in England between
the second half of the fourteenth century and I750. Some are merely re-editings;
some are almost entirely new books; all reflect to a certain degree the tastes and
prejudices of their period. Here I want briefly to look at some of these new versions
and how they were used or designed or took account of particular interests.
    Though it is at least arguable that in some small part the Travelsmay contain a
record of an actual journey, it is to all intents and purposes a clever compilation of
material from a variety of different sources.1 Originality of material is not to be
looked for, nor is its absence in any way grounds for adverse criticism: medieval
writers, it is superogatory to remark, were rarely worried about whether or not
their matter was new. It is obvious that where so much - nearly all - is compiled
from other fairly easily available sources, and from the common stock of knowledge,
what gives the work its individuality is the treatment of the material. Most
emphatically the Travels is an individual book; it has its own very distinctive
flavour, largely achieved by the holding together of much discrete material in the
form of a record of personal travel. The stamp of a subjectivity is imposed on
encyclopaedic material and makes it memorable. Moreover, that subjectivity is
itself well worth study: an attractive personais built up by the author for the Sir
John who in the text sees, hears, or is told of these things (or, in important instances,
explicitly does not see them), a persona,         characterized by the casual remark, the
oblique boast under the mask of humility, the occasional assumption of robust and
sceptical good sense, who operates as an evaluative mechanism: his response to
what he sees is meant by the author to be analogous to the reader's, but at the same

6                     The Metamorphoses Sir John Mandeville
                                                 of
time as the persona supporting or undermining the sense of what he sees he is also
                       is
forcing the reader to evaluate himself. Is the European who laughs at nonsense in
Cathay quite sure he cannot show a similar foolishness in Catholic Europe ? Is the
charity of the pagan not a reproach to Christian Europe ? Throughout the book the
author, through the persona, emphasizes the common traits in humanity and
suggests that Europe does not have a monopoly of truth, religion, or knowledge.
Nature or 'kind', he insists, is one and indivisible; what is impossible in Europe is
impossible everywhere, specifically excluding special providences. Moreover, the
'marvels of men', descending ultimately from Herodotus, Pliny, and Solinus, and
other marvels of nature, are given remarkably little space: in view of the later
reputation of Mandeville'sTravelsas a wonder-book chiefly composed of lies, the
reader is struck,l on first turning to an early text, to find so little made of'wonders'.
The 'marvels of men', for example, are crammed together in a single page.
Comparison of Mandeville's Travels with its sources shows that the author
deliberately edited so as to reduce incidence of 'wonders'. Throughout, the book
                                        the
works through understatement rather than the overstatement those who have not
read it attribute to it as an article of faith.2 These are all rather sophisticated
attitudes to take, and it is the attractiveness of the persona         with his matter-of-fact
style (not, though, without gentle and at times rather subtle humour) which
makes what could have been a tract (and a tract rather Lollard in tone, in many
ways) into what all critics admit to have been a wildly popular book - one,
perhaps, of the most read of medieval books.3 The resultant book is a delicate
thing; it has a real charm, and is at the same time a thoughtful book, one which
embodies as true a picture of the world as anyone in the fourteenth century
could have given.
   But nothing is static. What we discern as these admirable, delicate features of
the book in the Egerton and Cotton versions were being coarsened in other
manuscripts at the time the Egerton version was being written. This was inevitable:
the careful placing of the material by the restrained and subtle use of the persona
is the fruit of a sophisticated intelligence, and it needs, perhaps, a sophisticated
intelligence to respect it. In the case of a popular book, such as the Travels            became,
progressive coarsening of the texture was perhaps only to be expected; the mild,
sceptical assertions of Sir John became the tub-thumping assertiveness of the
Queen of Hearts. The progress, noted by Mrs Bennett, from a respectable edition
to a cheap, coarsened, and violently shortened chapbook, does not depend on the
existence of printing; it is an inevitable concomitant of popular telling. From
romance to street-ballad is a commonplace decline; we shall find exactly the same
with Mandeville, even if we can only infer the existence of the ballad.4
  1 As was the anonymous editor (Le Neve or Cashel) of the Cotton text, first printed in 1725 (see
his Preface).
  2 This short discussion of the book is condensed from
                                                           Chapters 3 and 4 of my doctoral thesis
'Mandeville's Travels: The Book and its Importance in England, I356-I750',      University of East
Anglia, 1971. The quality of the book is best seen in the Egerton and Cotton versions.
  3 The vast number (over three hundred) of surviving manuscripts alone is proof of this popularity,
without any mention of the wide and demonstrable use of the Travels by many writers all over
Europe in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
  4 See William London, Catalogue the Most Vendible
                                   of                   Booksin England (London, I657), Sigs A4V,
C2r-v.
                                    C. W. R. D. MOSELEY                                           7
 The 'Travels'and theCompendia
The Travelswas early pressed into compendia: the Livre de Merveillesof 1403,
basically Jean le Lonc's compendium which was probably Mandeville's source,
contains the Travelsand Odoric of Pordenone's narrative, one of his sources; it
professes to be an authoritative collection of materials on the East. Clearly the
compiler of this manuscript regarded Mandeville (quite rightly) as first-class
informative geography: information above all. This process continued for many
years. Michel Velser's German translation, made in about I393, is included in a
short manuscript of astronomical works, presumably because the compiler thought
the account of the Pole star important.1 Glasgow, Hunterian MS T.4.I was
compiled by a man who was most interested in the East, and was prepared to have
a well-written manuscript of 340 folios on vellum including all the best authorities:
            Guido delle Colonne                   HistoriaDestructionisTroiae
            Archbishop    Turpin                  Itinerarium
            Julius Valerius                       HistoriaAlexandri Magni
            MarcoPolo
            Odoricde Foro Iulii                   De Turcia
            Mandeville                            Travels
The process is common: Hakluyt's first edition2 of the PrincipallNavigations               (1589)
is openly a compendium specifically gathered to provide a ready fund of information
for his countrymen aspiring to commerical exploits in the Orient - as in his
Divers voyagestouching Discovery America(1582) the motive of providing his
                           the             of
countrymen with commercial inducement and geographical information in a
readily accessible form is strong.3 Samuel Purchas, a most willing Elisha, clawed
down Hakluyt's mantle on himself, and included Mandeville in the Pilgrimes                 (1625)
at a time when he was already losing respect as a geographical authority - if he
had not already lost it. But by Purchas's time, his readers were more interested in
picturesque descriptions and theological musings than in Hakluyt's statistics,4
and Purchas readily purveyed them. It is important that within so short a space of
time two writers, the one ostensibly following the other, should use Mandeville for
such different purposes. Mandeville's portrait is even included on the title page of
the Pilgrimes   together with King Solomon, Columbus, and other worthies. Hakluyt
(and Purchas) gave English currency to the Vulgate version of the Travels;later
writers - Wordsworth or Coleridge for example - often read their Mandeville in
the form it took in the first edition of the PrincipallNavigationsor the Pilgrimes.
  1 Innsbruck, Universitatsbibliothek 750, folios 3ov-32v. See E. J. Morall, 'MichelVelser
                MS                        Hs
and his GermanTranslationof Mandeville'sTravels',       Durham          Journal,55 (I962), I6-22
                                                               University
(p. I7).
   2 Though not the second,for reasonsto be discussed   later.
   3 G. B. Parks, RichardHakluytand theEnglish Voyages,
                                                      American Geographical Society Publications,
IO (New York, 1928), pp. 68-9; see also the Litho Facsimile of the PrincipallNavigations, edited by
R. A. Skelton and D. B. Quinn, Hakluyt Society (Cambridge, I965), p. xxv.
  4 See Louis B.
                   Wright, Middle-classCulturein ElizabethanEngland (Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
I935), p. 536.
                                                                                                  2
8                      The Metamorphoses Sir John Mandeville
                                                  of
    Hakluyt's version (drastically cut)1 is Purchas's source, and his presentation of
the Travels is worth noting. The text and prefatory matter may represent a work
prepared for publication some years before as one of Hakluyt's Paris series of pub-
lished texts which, for some reason, did not appear.2 Whatever the reason, the
 Travels differs sharply from everything else in its presentation. Hakluyt extols the
scholarship and good sense of Sir John, while, at the same time, warning his reader
 that the text has been corrupted by scribes and printers. He seems to have been one
 of the first to recognize that blanket approval or condemnation of this old book
simply will not serve; but he is, like everyone else, at a loss how to distinguish
 between what is original and what is not.3 His side-notes carefully point out where
 even the coarsened Vulgate text allows Mandeville to be sceptical (for example,
 p. 36) and cases of 'diligentia Mandevilli' (p. 42); they also highlight, for ease of
 reference, important topics - such as, interestingly enough, the fact that 'Con-
 versio Saracenorum non desperanda' (p. 43): this, for the clergyman Hakluyt, as
well as for others, was still a live issue.4 Hakluyt introduces Mandeville as 'eruditum
et insignem Authorem (Balao, Mercatore, Ortelio, et aliis testibus)' whose account
has been contaminated by the lies of scribes and printers; let him who is skilled in
history and geography distinguish what is true (p. 77). Until a better author can be
found, let the reader use Mandeville, as Hakluyt has had to do. In the Vulgate
 Travels which follows, Hakluyt chose to include a curious chapter attached to the
text at some unknown date following the colloquy with the Sultan. It occurs in none
of the English versions. The argument runs thus:
Wonders were created by a wonderful God so that his creatures might understand Him. He
who is omnipotent has made whatever he wants; when we see something we have not seen
before, our spirit is amazed not because it is wonderful of itself, but because it is new to us.
God is the Type of all, and so heavenly creatures are more close to the Type in proportion as
they are nearer to God. Earthly ones, more remote in situation, are by that fact more divergent
and more contrary among themselves. So whoever is wise is not astonished when he sees
strange things that are earthly; but those who do not trust the intellect before the senses and
who more readily believe their bodily rather than their spiritual vision; who, moreover, have
never left their birthplace, these people hardly will or can believe the truths told by others
of the diverse things in the world.5 For if a man will only go to the next state, he will find
   1 See PurchasHis Pilgrimes,20 vols (Glasgow, 1905-7), xi, 365-94 (I625 edition, III, i. I28-39).
Purchas refers the reader to Hakluyt for the full version of 'these few Latin extracts' (p. 363). His
version continues the process of progressively stronger and coarser emphasis alluded to above in
early manuscripts (see side note to page 385; III, i. 135). The side notes make it clear how much has
been omitted; there is no Old Man of the Mountains, no Lamory, no monsters, no vegetable lamb.
Purchas recognized duplication when he saw it (see pp. 382-3; III, i. 134) and had already included
Polo and Odoric, where similar marvels appear, in his book.
   2 See the PrincipallNavigations,p. xxvii.
   3 Purchas followed: 'I suspect that some later Fabler out of the Tales of Ogerus the Dane hath
stuffed this storie' (p. 363; III, i. I27); 'Our Mandevile travelled from Jerusalem beyond Jerico,
from Christendome to remotest Ethnikes, and hath fallen among Theeves: the Friarly Priest and
Levite not onely neglected him, but I am afraid played the Theeves thus to rob and wound him ...
Here you may finde lyes by retaile efficta, afficta, affixa, to this Mandevile; who there, is made a
maunde vile full of such pedlerie, unworthy thy sight' (p. 364; III, i. 128). The burden of his case is
that a monkish hand interpolated the untrustworthy bits in Mandeville; let the reader discard what
he feels necessary.
   4 The interest of the clergy in overseas expansion is discussed by Louis B. Wright, Religion and
Empire(New York, I965), pp. 58-6o, 84-7. The condemnatory attitudes of Ricold of Monte Croce
and pseudo-Odoric were the most usual (Wright, pp. I I6 ff.), but the spirit of Lull is still alive in
some degree (Wright, pp. 50, 86).
  5 Compare George Wither, AbusesStriptand Whipt (London, I614), sigs N3v, T2v, and T3r.
                                    C. W. R. D. MOSELEY                                             9
differences of speech, customs, fruits, animals; the further he goes, the greater the difference.
Therefore, despite the fools and unbelievers, the author will continue to describe what he
saw. (pp. 45 ff.)
Now this is an important interpolation: it tackles the question of doubt directly,
even if the reasoning that diversity is increased by distance, as a function of it, is
wrong, and Hakluyt, who could easily have edited it out, chose to include it;
America seemed indeed to have provided all the medieval marvels.l Hakluyt's
presentation of Mandeville in his practical anthology, therefore, is important to
the present discussion for several reasons: it supports the intrinsic geographical
worth of the book, while at the same time picking out the real drawback to the use
of it - what he saw as its contaminated nature and what we should call an obsolete
methodology. Secondly, it presented a quasi-logical defence of mirabilia which was
not yet discredited in the eighteenth century. Hakluyt's own work as a geographer
led him to reject, for practical use, what was imprecise;2 with increasing discrimina-
tion in the use of materials, in 1598 he left out of the second edition the imprecise
Mandeville. But the first edition caught the imagination of the age; and it is clear
that practical men like Ralegh used it extensively. Ralegh's knowledge of and
respect for Mandeville, discernible in the Discovery, was gained from Hakluyt; the
account of him in the History of the World clearly depends on Hakluyt's Vulgate
text.3 Of such importance can the anthologizer's editing be.
    The Travels was also, however, frequently included in collections having no
discernible underlying theme. A version is included in the unrelated miscellany in
BM MS Cotton Appendix iv (folios 59-102);               MS Dd I 17 in Cambridge University
Library, the Liber Glastoniensis, contains as well as Mandeville a hotchpotch of
topographical, historical, and pious material including Piers Plowman. Bodleian MS
Rawlinson D 99, one of the two manuscripts of the Bodley version, was originally
accompanied by Cato's Distichs, Lydgate's Dietary, a tale from the ConfessioAmantis,
 The Siege of Troy, The Siege of Thebes, a Romance of Gawain and Galaron, Occleve's
De regimineprincipum,       Juliana Berners's manual of hunting, and a Manuale Curatorum
- a very heterogeneous collection, a library in itself.4 But manuscripts containing
only the Travels, like Cotton Titus C xvi, exist, and the unrelated gatherings may
plausibly be the binding for mere convenience of the works of many scribes. The
inclusion of the Travels in compendia, however, happened often enough for us to be
sure that Mandeville was often valued only for the specific information he gave.
    Far more often than the entire Travels was anthologized, information from the
book was used without acknowledgement; and here we are not dealing with
imaginative literature, but with works of information. The chaplain to Sir Richard
Guylforde, who wrote an account of his patron's trip to the Holy Land in I500,
one of the latest of the pilgrimages, was clearly very familiar with the Travels, and
incorporated sections of it almost verbatim. The story of the Field Florissht, Lot's
   1 Compare Sir Walter Ralegh, The Discoveryof the Large, Rich and Beautiful Empire of Guiana
(c.2 1596), edited by R. H. Schomburgk, Hakluyt Society (London, I848), pp. 84, 85, 86.
     He omitted the report of the Englishman Ingram's walk across America from Mexico, as
reported to Burghley in 1582, 'for incredibility'; yet it was quite true. The 'incredibility' resulted
from lack of clear terms with which to judge scale (see G. B. Parks, RichardHakluytand the English
Voyages,  pp. 79 ff., 99).
   3 London, 1614; Part I, Book iv, p. 207.
   4 K. L. Smith, 'A Fifteenth-century Vernacular MS Reconstructed', Bodleian LibraryRecord,7
(1966), 234-41    (p. 235).
 IO                   The Metamorphoses Sir John Mandeville
                                                of
wife, the description of Jerusalem, and other sections are borrowed without any
acknowledgement.' The Pylgrymage Sir Richard
                                          of             Torkyngton,  supposed to have taken
place in 1517, has recently been claimed as a forgery based on Guylforde; the
borrowings from Mandeville are taken over yet again.2 Many of Mandeville's
stories found their way into Hartmann Schedel's Nuremberg               Chronicle(I493) (with
some account of his life); Munster's Cosmographia          (I544)  used much of the Travels
and became a popular source of information on the East. All the more queer
phenomena in the Travelswere taken over, man and beast, without Mandeville
once being mentioned. Even the woodcut illustrationsfrom Sorg's Augsburg edition
 (1470)   of the Travels were taken.3
    The late fifteenth-centuryand sixteenth-centurynaturalistslike Gesner,Belon, and
Aldrovandus took much from Mandeville; Mandeville and other orientalist writers
and travellers laid many of the foundations on which they built.4 The importance
of this for modern science cannot be over-emphasized. Similarly in the case of
geographical and topographical works, of natures both popular and 'scientific';
Ortelius lists Mandeville among his authorities, and Mercator's map claims
Mandeville as one of its sources.When Pynson and de Worde published Mandeville,
they were clearing the way for the new geography, and people like Mercator showed
good judgement when they recognized the real advances in geographical knowledge
contained in Mandeville.5 It seems clear, therefore, that in the works of information
of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries we are frequently reading unacknowledged
extracts from the Travels.
 The 'Travels'as Wonder-book,      Devotional  Guide,andRomance
While we cannot discount the importance of the type of re-presentation we have
just noted, it is not the most interesting. The Travels     were several times re-presented,
in what would be, saving the title, an almost unrecognizable form. Parts of the full
account are extracted to serve a particular purpose, and the link with the Travels
proper is kept simply to give auctoritas.       These bastard versions give us an idea of
how some of Mandeville's readers regarded his book; they used it as a storehouse
of exempla well as for entertainment and instruction. Most important, they assume,
             as
in writing for what is patently an audience not of the highest education, that an
appeal to the authority of Sir John is sufficient to quiet any incipient doubts about
the value of what they are saying - no mean testimony to the reputation of the
book.
    The Bodley version of Mandeville tends to prefer those elements of the fabulous
in the Travelsto those of the theological or factual.6 The short verse epitome of the
   1 ThePylgrymage Sir Richard
                    of           Guylforde theHolyLandA.D. 1506, edited by H. Ellis, Camden
                                          to
Society (London, 1851), pp. xv, II, 26, 35-6, 43, 53-4.
   2 See M. C. Seymour,'EarlyEnglishEditionsof Mandeville's            The
                                                               Travels', Library,Fifth Series,19
 (I964), 202-7.
   3Josephine WatersBennett,pp.    241, 245. There were Englishabridgements in 1572 and I574.
                                                   an
This highlights difficulty findsin attributing unacknowledged
                the        one                                         borrowing a laterauthor
                                                                                in
to its proximateor ultimatesource.With both the Travels the Cosmographia
                                                         and                            without
                                                                             circulating,
the mentionof a name one can only call what may be a certaintya possibility.
   4 P. A.        Animal in English
                        Lore           Literature
   5 G. B. Robin, Richard
           Parks,                and
                                                (London, 1932), pp. I2-14.
                        Hakluyt theEnglishVoyages, 5I; E. G. R. Taylor, Tudor
                                                        p.                            Geography,
 1485-1583 (London, I930), p. 5.
   6 See M. C. Seymour, The BodleyVersion 'Mandeville's
                                             of             Travels'EETS, OrdinarySeries, 253
(London, I963), p. xiv; M. C. Seymour, 'A Mediaeval Redactor at Work', Jotes and Queries,206
(I96I), 169-71.
                                     C. W. R. D. MOSELEY                                        II
Travels BM MS Addit. 37049, if. 3-91 is the opposite; it takes material from three
          in
parts of the Travels, concentrating the whole time on what we may call the
'devotional' (for example the descriptions of the Holy Land) and the factual. The
first 347 lines are extracted from Mandeville's chapters on Jerusalem and the Holy
Land; the next 146 return to the first chapters of the book for the ways of getting
there, and from 496 to the end the fabulous regions of the East are briefly dealt
with. Many of the fables are gone. Probably written at Axholme, the epitome is
                                                          in
evidence of the many-sided appeal of the Travels the fifteenth century: somebody,
apparently, thought its devotional information worth a precis.
    Bodleian MS Ashmole 751 is exclusively concerned with Christian matters.2
Nearly all its content is taken from the first third of the Travels.There is no proper
sequence or plan; the events of the crucifixion, with their accompanying quotations
from the Vulgate, are extracted rather than summarized; the Well of Youth and
the philosophers of Olympus make a token appearance, and two lines deal with
the 'compas and tho roundness' of the earth. St Thomas's miracles are given
disproportionate importance. There is a clear concentration on the devotional
features we find in Mandeville'sTravelsitself and for this man at least the Travels
seem to have been chiefly valued for the account of the Holy Land. He cannot,
however, entirely keep his mind from straying to other, perennial interests.
    The predominantly devotional interest of the authors of these versions was
largely shared by the man responsible for the collection of miscellaneous pieces in
Bodley MS e musaeo I6o,3 mainly of late fifteenth-centuryor early sixteenth-century
date. In the seventeenth century, on the binding of various manuscripts, a verse item
based on the Travelsand on Polo's Divisament Mondewas inserted.4 As we have
                                                        dou
it, it is divided into three sections:
          'Off the Grete Caan, Emperour of Tartaria', I-60
          'Off the Grete Cane', 6I-I84
          'The Commonyng of Sir Iohan Mandeville and pe Gret Sowdon', 185-313
          (the Manuscript is incomplete)
The fragment is intended as a popular account of the East, and is heavily pointed
with Christian moralizing5- indeed, 'Christ', 'Christian' or 'Christianity'
(excluding 'God') occur no less than twenty-two times in the text. The editing is
   1 Printed by Dr Seymour, 'The English Epitome of Mandeville'sTravels',Anglia, 84 (I966), 27-58.
   2 Printed by Dr Seymour, 'Secundum Johannem Maundyle', English Studiesin Africa, 4 (I96I),
148-58 (see pp. I50-6).
   3 The contents include devotional
                                       pieces on the patriarchs and saints, followed by a poem on
'King Herre the eight of fair Yngland', then by the version of Mandeville discussed here, and then
more devotional pieces.
   4 It did not form
                      part of the original book, and is imperfect at the end; see M. C. Seymour,
'Mandeville and Marco Polo: A Stanzaic Fragment', AUMLA, 21 (I964), 39-52. Dr Seymour
discusses the poet's use of his sources, and points out (p. 40) that the stanzaic fragment closely
parallels the Cotton text. It has close verbal echoes of both the Egerton and Cotton texts. Lines
I85-282    were printed by Thomas Wright and J. O. Halliwell, ReliquiaeAntiquae,2 vols (London,
 I841-3),  II, I 3.
   5 Seymour, 'Mandeville and Marco Polo', p.    4I.
 I2                     The Metamorphoses Sir John Mandeville
                                                   of
selective in the extreme.1 Of the Travels the author has ruthlessly cut all that is not
 to his purpose: he is interested in the Great Khan, his wealth, and his faith, and
 not much else. He takes details of his wealth impartially from Marco Polo and
 Mandeville. But if intended as an account of the East, none of the real geographical
importance of Mandeville's Travels or Marco Polo was recognized. The poet is
interested solely in popular and interesting snippets of Tartar history,2 and critical
reflections on Christendom are made: 'Cublay's' attempt to receive instruction
concerning Christianity failed through Christendom's fault (11.21-32).3 His good
government is praised (49-56), but with the appeal:
                                O Ihesu, lat pi mercy falle
                                Opon thes folke the soth to see.
                                                                  (1. 71)
All the account of the Holy Land, the Saracens, and the Eastern Christians in the
 Travels is ignored - except, significantly, the Sultan's diatribe against the failings
of Christians; other elements are few. There is constant reference, however, to the
sinfulness of Christendom:
                     The Turkis trustis we salle neuer it [the Holy Land] wyn
                     als lang ase we thus synfulle be.
                                                                                      (1. 183)
The longest episode in the poem is based exclusively on Mandeville's colloquy with
the Sultan, and the verse account closely follows the Travels. A little biographical
spice is added:
                           Opon a tym when Ser Iohan Mandevelle
                           In Egipe was in his iornaye,
                           Two 3er with the Sowden did he dwelle.
                           Wel beloued he was of hym allewaye.
                           A lordis doghter and his ayr ryght gaye
                           He offert to hym if he wald forsake
                           His fayth and take Machometis laye,
                           But no sich bargan wald he make.
                                                                          (1. 185)
The author knew the Travels very well indeed - well enough to conflate the
information relevant to Mandeville's stay in Egypt and to recall the opinion of the
   1 The use made of Marco Polo does not concern us
                                                         here, except to note that this is a very rare
instance of Polo being equated in importance with Mandeville as a geographical authority.
Mandeville was very largely believed, whereas Polo was not. (Fra Pipino's fourteenth-century Latin
version was, so far as is known, the only version known in England until John Frampton's translation
in 1579.) Only with Robert Burton does the coupling become commonplace - a coupling of liars:
'I would censure all... Sir John Mandeville's, Olaus Magnus', Marco Polo's lies ...' (Anatomy        of
Melancholy,  edited by Floyd Dell and P. Jordan Smith (New York, I927), p. 412. Part n, Section in,
Member 3). But it is no more than a commonplace: Burton did not possess a copy of Mandeville.
See 'Robert Burton and the Anatomyof MAelancholy',     Proceedings the OxfordBibliographical
                                                                   of                           Society,
I (1922-6), edited by F. Madan, pp. 224 if.
   2 Mandeville's lurid story of the death of 'Baldach' seems to have                  his imagination
                                                                               caught
(11.I65-70).
   3 This particular episode probably derives from the tardy reaction of the Pope to the request of
the Khan relayed through the Polos for Christian missionaries - although it is told of the Old
Man of the Mountains by Ricold of Monte Croce.
                                 C. W. R. D. MOSELEY                                I3
 Chinese of their own superiority (11.295-300). But his purpose is mainly homiletic;
for as moral exhortation this colloquy is of a time-honoured and effective type.
 He has tried to keep the effectiveness of the persona the Travelsby presenting the
                                                           of
poem as dialogue, and by using the authoritative figure of Mandeville; but it is
not as forceful morally as the Travels there is no sympathy with the Sultan and
                                           for
 the virtues of the cult he represents. The author could not refrain from putting in
some irrelevances, scoffing the while at the ignorance of the heathen. Curiously,
 the Sowden, 'the Turk and the gret Caune' (11.254-6) are placed in an unholy
alliance with Prester John against Christianity, and the poem tails off badly;
snippets of interesting but quite irrelevant information from the rest of the Travels
  -Mahomet's paradise, and the burial of the Khan with his arms and a white
mare - weaken the moral force. The author clearly saw the Travels an important
                                                                       as
indictment of the West, whatever else it was; he adds an interpolation on the abuses
of the clergy to his moral exemplum   suggested by Mandeville's colloquy, and extends
the Sultan's charges by illustration (11.205-224). He adds a little trope of his own:
                           ffor Christis loue lat vs forbere
                           our ugly sinnes, and radly ryse.
                           Our mede is mekylle in Paradise,
                           Yf we thus do, or elles dowtlesse,
                           Despyt in helle in paynes grise,
                           Sal bee our set in payne endlese.
                                                              (1. 239)
The chief characteristic of the poem is, as Dr Seymour says (p. 42), its 'vigorous
piety' and it was probably forceful to an audience accustomed to the bluff verse of
the popular romances. But there is no structure; its borrowed bones show through,
and do not knit. It is, however, important as supporting evidence that Mandeville's
 Travels was often approached not only for information but for its doctrinal and
devotional facets. These might be condensed for sheer blunt force, while retaining,
as a guarantee of 'auctoritee', the name of the Travels. Here is the Travels being
used exactly as we would expect one of the popular preachers to use it, as a source
of moral exempla.
   This proliferation of clumsy, coarse, verse-extracts in the fifteenth century
suggests that many people at that time would hear rather than read versions of the
 Travels. It also supports the evidence already known for the great popularity of the
 Travels; no abbreviator would work on a book that was not in demand. The
variation in the purpose of these various editings shows that the Travels was clearly
regarded both as a devotional and as an educational book-                but the real
mechanism of evaluation set up by the Travels is, inevitably, lost. The attempts to
continue them testify, perhaps, to the popularity of the CanterburyTales; they also
show that the public was willing to tolerate less than Chaucer's quality. And so it is
with Mandeville. The degradation of the Travels from a cultivated romance of
travel to something close to a street-ballad can be seen in 'The Commonyng'; there
is an intermediate stage. The Metrical Version of the Travels perhaps represents it.
Again, it is an example of special editing, a fresh redaction based on the Travels for
an audience to which the original was uncongenial or unavailable or both.
  I4                     The Metamorphoses Sir John Mandeville
                                                   of
 The MetricalVersion
 The Metrical Version is to be found in Coventry Public Record Office MS Acc
 325,1 of the mid fifteenth century. The version of Mandeville2 is incomplete, though
 not seriously so, and is in rough octosyllabic couplets. The poet has no outstanding
 ability; the verse is uneven in rhythm and full of half-rhymes. Two questions about
 the Metrical Version must dominate the present discussion: the interests and nature
 of the audience for which it was made, and the treatment of the Travels.3Con-
 sideration of these topics may lead us to certain conclusions about the author's
 response to the original.
    The poem illustrates quite clearly the process of degradation. The Knight of
 St Albans4 has disappeared completely as a figure in the book. He is mentioned at
 the beginning, and no more than three times in the text;5 the careful use of his
persona place and evaluate what he describes is forgotten. What he told, rather
            to
than any values placed on it, is important, as in all these edited versions, and the
subtleties and curiosities of his description are flattened so as to be indistinguishable
from those in other books of marvels.
    The poem is designed for oral recitation (see lines I I-I4),                 and the emphasis is
 on 'wonders': nothing whatsoever is said of the moral duty of a Crusade, of the
 need for self-knowledge, of the nature of God's world. The author frankly states
that he finds the full version of Mandeville's           Travelssomething of a bore, and offers
his own work as an improved summary of it:
                                  But in kat bokeis moch thinge
                                 That nedethnaughtin is talkinge.
                                 And perefor hit nedethnau3t,
                                               seth
                                 As I haue herdemen sein offt,
                                 Be it in gesteothirin songe,
                                 And it be made ouerlonge,
                                 Hit makethmen werieand lothe to here
                                 Thou3hit be neuerso good matere.
                                 And hereforthis litille tretis
                                 Out of that boke draweit ys,
   1 Mandeville's  Travels appearson folios 77-95. The other items in this MS are: if. I-7o: Hoccleve,
De RegiminePrincipum     and other poems; 70-4: Lydgate, Dance of Death; 75-7: Chaucer, A B C and
other minor poems; 98-129: Titus and Vespasian;137-67: Lydgate, Siegeof Thebes;I67-8: A poem of
twenty-four four-line stanzas, commencing: 'Behold we wrecches in this world present'. The manu-
script has been described and the Chaucerian items printed by A. I. Doyle and G. B. Pace in 'A
New Chaucer Manuscript', PMLA, 83 (I968), 25-34. I owe thanks to Mr A. A. Dibben, City
Archivist of Coventry, for a short description of the manuscript and the reference to the article cited
above. There seems to be no discernible theme to this collection of items in one manuscript and the
inclusion of Mandeville'sTravelsmust, I think, be coincidental.
   2 It comprises 2,949 lines, and probably no more than one or two leaves are
                                                                                      missing. Dr M. C.
Seymour most kindly allowed me to use his transcript of the manuscript, prior to the publication
of his edition of the poem (The Metrical Version 'Mandeville'sTravels', EETS, Ordinary Series, 269
                                                  of
(London, 1973)).
   3 By this I do not mean the amount of correspondence (or lack of it) between the Metrical Version
and the Standard texts. This sort of comparison in detail is dealt with by Dr Seymour in his edition.
   4 It is clear from lines
                            15-34, 47, and elsewhere that the author of this version is using a text of the
Insular Version and that the Liege complication is unknown to him. Mandeville's kin 'ere liven ful
fele' (1. 22) at St Albans.
   5 For example he is only said to have crossed the Vale Perilous (11.2322 ff.), but nothing is said
of his having drunk of the Fountain of Youth or of his talking with the Sultan. To be fair, the author
of the Metrical Version may have worked from an already abbreviated copy; but the verve with
which he re-orders and re-casts Mandeville's material suggests as an exemplar not an epitome, but a
full version (see Dr Seymour's discussion of the origin of the version and its author, pp. xi-xx).
                                   C. W. R. D. MOSELEY                                        I5
                            That of alle merueilistellys
                            That he sawe and sometinge elles.
                                                                         (1. 35)1
The author may have recognized Mandeville's own distinction between the value
of what he himself saw and what he was told (see lines 30-4) as evidence; but since
he expects his audience to be uninterested in it, no attempt is made to write an
evaluative or critical account - entertainment is the main aim. There is no
questioning of 'authority'. This basic attitude accepted, the author improves
Mandeville's book further. Between lines 67 and 462 he interpolates a description
of Rome, heavily reliant on the traditional accounts of the wonders of that city
and of the Stations of Rome.2 He works in a considerable amount of heavily
fictionalized traditional matter on Romulus, Enias, Vergil the Magician, and, as
so commonly in medieval English writings, Brut; the author's interest centres
entirely on the legendary and the religious associations of the place - and the
more sensational the better. Mandeville's description of the Holy Places in
Jerusalem is much more devotional and restrained. With this opening, it is
to be expected that, as does indeed happen, Mandeville's travel would be treated
simply as a source of unrationalized wonders.
    The Travelsis followed fairly comprehensively, although at times the sequence
of events and of geography becomes hopelessly confused - far more confused than
in the original. Additional elements are worked into the text: the sages who climbed
Athos to write their names in the dust are named (11.549 if.); the story of the Seven
Sleepers (11.645 if.) and the building of the Tower of Babel (11.1330 if.) are
interpolated; and not only Alexander but all the Nine Worthies are sent to the
Trees of the Sun and Moon. Mandeville's account of Suttee, of Tibetan and Parsee
funeral customs are grossly inflated (and conflated) into what can only be termed
a horror story. The magic gems which Mandeville says are found at the roots of
giant reeds are turned into huge rocks which three giants transported to Ireland;
thence they were brought by Uther Pendragon and Merlin as building material
for Stonehenge (11.2111 f.). The Empress Helena is duly related to King Coel
 (11. 970 if.), and Julius Caesar appears to defeat Cassivellaunus and build the
Tower of London (11.     371 if.). Clearly the writer is working to include the maximum
of superlative marvels and romance themes, particularly those dear to English ears,
and if Mandeville's book suffers, it was, as he expostulated, too long and boring
anyway. But the important point is that he is treating Mandeville's Travelsin the
same category as romance.
    This sort of amplificatio perhaps understandable and foreseeable. If our analysis
                             is
and explanation of the book's subtle nature is correct, one might postulate that the
omissions in recast versions of the Travelswould be of two kinds: those passages of
philosophical, moral, or religious purpose - often of a highly individual kind-
and those 'marvels' of peculiarly delicate effect. This is precisely the case. Mande-
ville's important discussion of the circumnavigation and circumference of the
earth is omitted; so is his insistence throughout on Nature having the same laws
everywhere, and on God's love being beyond the compass or defining of man's
   1 Note the emphasis on mirabiliaagain. The quality of the verse can be roughly gauged from this
quotation, though it must be admitted that there are many extant romances the verse of which is
rougher than this.
   2 Dr
        Seymour speculates that there might have been an account of Rome in his source.
 i6                   The Metamorphoses Sir John Mandeville
                                                  of
mind. The accurate account in all main versions of Mandeville'sTravelsof the
religion of the Greeks and eastern Christians is suppressed; the Greeks are given
a religion clearly derived from Mandeville's own account of Islamic belief about
 Christ.' The eastern Christians are forgotten, and though the Bragmans (and their
altercation with Alexander) are described, it is in the most cursory of terms;2
Mandeville's subtle sympathy has gone. The fair account of Islam has disappeared,
and the colloquy with the Sultan, felt by another poet more or less contemporary
with this author to be important enough morally for a poem on its own, has been
entirely suppressed. In this poem, it would be uncomfortably serious. On the
second count, the charming account of the sexual reproduction of the diamond
and the humour of the gold-digging ants have both gone; though the manuscript
has a leaf missing at line 2 6o, the incomplete account of the vegetable lamb (11.
2161 f.) would not lead one to suppose that the author had understood and
included Mandeville's delicate placing of the story.
    The omissions are at least as significant as the inclusions in leading us to suppose
that the Metrical Version was made for an audience whose main literary entertain-
ment would be the hearing of metrical romances, the watching of miracle plays,
and the hearing of sermons. This audience had not the type of education and
experience which would enable it to appreciate extended prose - a sophisticated
achievement in itself. The jingling verse would tire all but the least educated ear;
the treatment is as far from that of the Egerton or Cotton versions as the Rimeof
Sir Thopasis from the Knight's Tale. This version represents a clear stage in the
process whereby a book in which treatment is of equal importance with subject
became a sensationalized chapbook or broadside ballad. Clearly, one fifteenth-
century reader at least felt the book had something in it he could use for a popular
audience; equally clearly, he either did not understand or did not respect the serious
side of the book.
   Two final points remain: here, if we needed it, would be yet more evidence of
the lack of any feeling in the later Middle Ages for the integrity of a book;
Mandeville's    Travelsis a quarry whence came useful materials for another building.
Secondly, the very existence of this version, taken together with all the other
abbreviated and sensationalized versions already discussed, shows that, whatever
we now perceive to have been the merits of this remarkable book, the number of
people who responded to the subtlety we see in it must have been small - though
its popularity and ability to interest people can never be doubted.
Mandeville Loveandon theStage: Warner's
              in                                     'Albion's England'andtheLostPlay
By   the end of the fifteenth century, Mandeville was willy-nilly established in the
English imagination. Not only were there the new printed versions available (and
being widely read), but six generations had been exposed to tellings of the Travels
proper and of versions derived from it. Not surprisingly, the ideas of both Mande-
ville and the Travelsheld by any group of people or any given person could well
differ at one and the same time; after 1725, it would be possible to find one man
whose boyhood dreams, like Crabbe's, had been filled by the monsters and marvels
  1 See Dr Seymour's note to lines 569 if.
  2 I
      suspect they were only allowed in because the Alexander romances had made them obligatory
(see D. Everett, Essays on Middle English Literature
                                                   (Oxford, 1955), p. 55).
                                        C. W. R. D. MOSELEY                                         I7
of the chapbook version, whose youth had taught him contempt for the inaccurate
and lying traveller of the Defective/Standard version, and whose maturity had
found pleasure and edification in the newly-published Cotton version. In the early
sixteenth century, scepticism was not to be looked for, but 'Mandeville the traveller'
tout courtand the author of the Travels could co-exist discretely in one imagination.
This 'mythological' Mandeville will be of most interest to us in a moment.
     We can never hope to isolate an idea for examination, or hope that it will remain
homogeneous for discussion, and the 'mythological' Mandeville is no exception.
Just when, in William Warner's Albion's England (1586) we think we have as near
as possible isolated it, we find Ben Jonson using 'Mandeville' as a noun in obviously
quite a different - and not complimentary - way,1 Hakluyt and Frobisher
seeking hard information from the Travels, and Nashe poking fun at some version
of the same book. Yet the case of William Warner shows that by the third quarter
of the sixteenth century Mandeville was a sort of patron saint of English travellers
in at least one author's mind;2 as for the author of the 1612 ballad, St George's
Commendationto all Souldiers,3 Mandeville has taken his place with the heroes of
romance:
                      Beuis conquer'd Ascupart,    and after slew the Boore,
                      And then he crost beyond the seas to combat with the Moore.
                      Sir Isonbras,  and Inglesmore,  they were Knights bold,
                      And good sir lohn Mandeuile trauell much hath told:
                                                       of
                      These were EnglishKnights, that Pagansdid conuert.
So, logically enough, Warner writes a romance specially for Mandeville; and its
importance, both for the history of the influence of the Travels and as a continuation
of the process of special editing we have been discussing, is hardly to be exaggerated.
     The copy of the I6o24 edition of Albion's England in Cambridge University
Library (Syn 7.60.8) has a manuscript note on the flyleaf by the Revd J. Mitford
quoting, among that of other authorities, Francis Meres's opinion of Warner:
Warner in his absolute Albion's Englande hath most admirably penned the Historie of his
own Country from Noah to his time, i.e. to the raigne of Q Elizabeth. I have heard him
termed of the best wits of both our Universities, our English Homer ... F. Mere's [sic]
 Compar. Discourse, p. 152 (Repr.)
 Mitford was right to emphasize Meres's commendation of Warner; the frequency
 of editions shows the book's popularity, and it was well known to the university
 wits and, presumably, to Shakespeare and his fellow dramatists. Editions continued
 into the seventeenth century; it is the type of book that would have been greatly
 welcome to the young Milton with his voracious appetite for the legendary
 and historical, particularly when these concerned the subject of his early
    1 The Newe Inne, Act v, Scene 5:
                               For to these Savages I was addicted
                               To search their Natures, and make odd Discoveries
                               And here my wife, like a she Mandeville,
                               Ventred in disquisition after me.
    2 Warner's admiration for Mandeville is not shared by Drayton: Drayton's pride in his race's
achievement in travel is traced back to Wulfstan and Ohtere (see Complete      Works,edited by J. W.
Hebel, Kathleen Tillotson, and Bernard H. Newdigate, 5 vols (Oxford, I93I-4I),           rv, Polyolbion,
 Song xix, 11. 179 ff.).
    3 In The
               PepysBallads, edited by Hyder E. Rollins, 8 vols (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1929-32),
 I, 40 ff., 44.
    4 There were
                   prior editions in 1586, 1589, 1592, 1596, I597, and later ones in I606 and 1612.
 I8                   The Metamorphoses Sir John Mandeville
                                                  of
projected epic or drama. A useful compendium of classical and sub-classical
myths, it is a possible source for the Brut saga in Elizabethan drama: Leir, Ferrex
and Porrex, Locrin, Sabrina, Guiderius and Arviragus - who married the
daughter of the Roman Emperor - all make appearances. The popular account
of history deriving from Geoffrey of Monmouth is given in fourteener couplets;
when Elizabeth's age is reached, such events as the Armada appear in the later
editions, intermingled with popular school-themes like 'the Combat between the
 Flesh and the Spirit'. Books Eleven and Twelve are entirely devoted to the exploits
of the English Voyagers.
    In addition to the reliance the dramatists probably placed on it, it is almost
certain that Milton used it for Sabrina's history in Comus.His known interest in
travel and geography would be an incentive additional to his historical bent to
 turn towards an already well-known compendium. In so doing, he, no more than
his predecessors, can have avoided reading the curious recension of the Travels
which interlards the accounts of the travels of Jenkinson and others, and it may be
that he turned to the Travelsitself afterwardsjust as it can be shown he turned to
Jenkinson's own account.1 Warner's Mandeville romance might well be the source,
or have led him to the source, of some of the Mandeville elements in Comus.                 Clearly
 the picture of Mandeville and his Travelspresented by a book influential not only
on the great dramatists, but probably also on Milton, is not unimportant.
    Alternate chapters of Books Eleven and Twelve are given to contemporary
travellers - Willoughby, Chancellor, Jenkinson, Burroughs- and to the story
'Of Sir IohnMandeuil     and faire Elenors   loue'.2Warner has recast much of the material
of the Travelsinto the form of the letters Mandeville sends home to Elenor; and in
so doing turns many of the original elements into pretty sonneteer'scompliments:
               The Amazones,    thoselustieGirles,beleeveme lik't me well
               But nothingin the best of them but doth in you excell.
                                                                                 (P. 275)
   1 See R. R. Cawley,Milton theLiterature Travel
                              and              of        (Princeton,New Jersey, 1951), and the same
author'sMilton's         Craftsmanship:
                  Literary              A Study 'A BriefHistory Moscovia'
                                                 of               of           (Princeton,194 ).
   2 Here is a short           of Warner'splan: Book Eleven, Chapter 61: Mandeville'snoble
                      synopsis
parentage;his love for Elenor,the cousinof EdwardIII, who is sociallytoo elevatedfor him. This
worrieshim. In disguise,he joustssuccessfully her, and then prepares go abroad;Chapter62:
                                               for                         to
On the Voyagers;Chapter63: Mandeville's                                           of
                                             letterhometo Elenor;a description Egyptand points
east - the Well of Youth,the Phoenix,etc.; Chapter64: Chancellor;       Chapter65: Elenor'sreaction
to the letter. She confidesin Staffordthat she loves Mandeville,but loves the Green Knight who
jousted for her more. Stafford,Mandeville'sfriend,will help; Chapter66: Burroughs,        Jenkinson;
Chapter67: In Egypt, the SultanoffersMandevillea greatmatch; Mandevillecourtsher to forget
Elenor; Chapter   68: Jenkinson;Chapter69: Staffordcomfortsand entertainsElenor.Elenorand
Stafford'smistress,Dorcas, get into Mandeville'sroom and find the green armour;Chapter 70:
Essayon the Voyagersof Elizabeth's   day; Chapter71: Mandevillein Constantinople the winter.
                                                                                      for
Elenorand Dorcasconverse    aboutlove and marriage;Chapter72: The racesof Britain;Chapter73:
Stafford,in Italy, findsout that Mandevilleis in Constantinople. visit to Rome givesWarnerthe
                                                                   A
chanceto workin a description the ruins;Chapter74: 'A Tale to amuse';Chapter75: Mandeville
                                of
arrivesin Rome. MeetsStafford    with the disguisedDorcasand Elenor.MandevillerebukesStafford
for familiaritywith one of the ladies. Staffordpretendsto get money for the returnto England.
The disguisedElenorgets Mandeville's    ring [a reference the St Albansring noticedby Walsing-
                                                           to
ham?]; Chapter 76; 'A Tale to amuse' resumes;Chapter77: Revealing of identities;relief and
rejoicing.
   Warner'shandlingof the cumbersome      fourteener   couplethas all the virtuesand all the faultsof
that metre- the verse moves easily along, unclutteredby verbal and metaphorical        pyrotechnics.
It does preciselywhat Warnerwantedit to do; to tell the storyin a dignified,if at timesfacile,way.
There is a natural charm about the book; Warnerhas the gift of summingup interestinglythe
'known'historyof his country,and his imagination firedby the greatachievements the mariners
                                                    is                                of
of his day; Drayton'sPolyolbion           the
                                 expresses same feeling.
                                    C. W. R. D. MOSELEY                                     I9
The Phoenix is comparable only with Elenor; she has need neither of Balsam nor
of the Well of Youth. The framework of the romance is avowedly fictional:
                Who reades Sir John de Mandevilhis Travels, and his Sights,
                That wonders not ? and wonder may, if all be true he wrights.
                Yeat rather it beleeve (for most, now modernly approv'd)
                Than this our Storie, whence suppose he was to Travell mou'd.
                                                                          (Chapter 61, p. 267)1
Mandeville is, for Warner, the archetype of the traveller, and is therefore ideal
as a sort of tutelary deity for his discussion, easily paralleled in the literature of his
day, of the maritime exploits of his nation. The pride in Englishness which is so
notable a feature of English writing at the turn of the century - for example, in
Bishop Hall's Quo Vadis? A Just Censureof Travell2 or Drayton's Polyolbion - makes
it natural for him to celebrate these exploits, and to claim Mandeville as the
forerunner of them. It is interesting that in the early part of the romance Warner
sticks quite closely to the Defective version; moreover, the manner in which he
refers to Mandeville's experiences abroad, and Stafford's comment: 'How stoicall
growes Mandevil, quoth Stafford, since his Travell' (p. 313), suggest an amused
affection for, plus a thorough knowledge of, the cool persona of the Travels, at least
on Warner's part, and possibly on his readers' too. But why did he write the
romance at all? He believes in Mandeville's importance as a traveller, and seems
unable to make distinctions between Willoughby, Jenkinson, or Mandeville. As a
framework, the romance has its uses; Mandeville is, too, a useful father figure.
But there is more to it than this. The medieval romances in old and new forms
remained very popular in the sixteenth century. The use Shakespeare, for example,
made of romance elements is extensive, and a play like The Knight of the Burning
Pestle is a clear token of the popularity of chivalric romances, medieval or
modernized - dramatists do not waste time parodying something that their
audiences will not immediately recognize. Don Quixoteis based on precisely the same
assumptions, and was early translated into English.3 Besides the purpose already
described, therefore, Warner was also satisfying the popular taste for the knightly
and courtly romance, pinning his tale to the already romantic figure of arthritic
Sir John.
     The existence of this romance proves that by 1586 Mandeville was for some
people not only the author of a travel account useful for ships sailing to China
(Frobisher so regarded him and took a copy of the Travels to Baffin Bay in 1576), but
also a more shadowy figure compounded of truth and fiction, with whom liberties
could openly be taken: Warner himself hints at the doubt many felt as to how much
of the Travels was factually trustworthy (Chapter 6I, p. 267). Yet all the while
   1 It is interesting see thatWarner
                     to               wassomewhat   exercisedaboutMandeville's motiveforleaving
the country. Unrequitedlove was both fashionableand thoroughlyin keepingwith the romance
tradition.
   2
     London, I6I7. Hall's point by point refutationof the argumentfor travellingculminatesin a
desire that, for the people'sown good, the state shouldprevent their travelling.Englandis better
than anywhereelse; people who travelare fools.
   3 See Louis B.
                    Wright, Middle-class      in
                                       Culture Elizabethan  England, 84, 375-6. Mandevilleis
                                                                   pp.
coupledwith Don Quixote by RichardHead in a way that suggeststhat Don Quixotewas entirely
familiarto Englishreaders(The Western    Wonder: 0 Brazeel, Inchanted
                                                 or          an         IslandDiscovered
                                                                                       (London,
 I674), p. 2).
20                    The Metamorphoses Sir John Mandeville
                                                 of
there was a parallel feeling that there were indeed more things in heaven and
earth than philosophy dealt with; as Warner put it, opening his romance:
            Inexplicable Nature, by the God of Nature wrought,
            Makes things seem Miracles to some by some not Wonders thought.
                                                                                       (p. 267)
Warner's attitude is similar to George Wither's:
                         ...  there's a number, too, that doe suppose,
                         All that beyond their little reason growes
                         Is surely false; And vainely doe vphold
                         That all reports which trauellers  vnfold
                         Of forraine lands, are lies, because they see
                         No such strange things in their own parishbe.l
The thorough scepticism and rationalism of a Montaigne or a Bacon concerning
the tests of Truth are the very things that make them stand out from their age;
ironically, all too often they are taken to typify it. It is ironic that Warner felt that
Mandeville needed this opening caveat; for it was Mandeville, almost alone of
popular medieval writers, who had insisted that all nature was one and indivisible,
and subject to general interpretation rather than special.
   Albion's England, influential as it was, is a useful guide to some of the received,
and transmitted, ideas of Mandeville. Clearly, some scepticism is abroad; the
knight is becoming almost a mythical figure, one who is a byword not only for
incredibilia (as in Ben Jonson) but also for the archetypal traveller. He is, too, in the
true sense of the word, a romantic figure. It is this picture of him that we must
expect men of the last half of the sixteenth century and the seventeenth century to
attach to the author when they sat and read the Travels. A curious picture;
'romantic' enjoyment of the story for its own sake, coupled with a niggling doubt
that this might be truth.
   We have reached this conclusion almost entirely by deduction from Albion's
England. There is a certain amount of circumstantially corroborative evidence
from another 'editing' of Mandeville exactly contemporary, and what may be a
reference to it by Nashe. The great vogue in the twenty-five years after 1586 for
plays on oriental themes2 did, as one would have expected, give rise to a play based
either on the Travels or on the figure of Mandeville.3 I have already shown that it
was regularly played in the early 1590s, and was moderately popular. Unless,
miraculously, a copy should turn up, we can obviously have no certain knowledge
of the form it took, though Nashe might be referring to it in an otherwise
inexplicable passage in Nashes Lenten Stuff: the Prayse of the Red Herring (1599) ;4
it could of course have been a dramatization of Warner, though such vapid theatre
is difficult to imagine. But we can at least legitimately assume that the Travels
existed in yet another form in the last part of the sixteenth century: someone had
turned it into a popular 'Eastern' play, and in so doing may well have made it more
  1 AbusesStript and Whipt (London, I614), sig. N3v. S. C. Chew, The Crescent the Rose (New
                                                                                  and
York, 1937), p. 5, calls this an 'unusual protest'. On the contrary, it is a common feeling. Jacques
de Vitry had said something similar and so had Mandeville. The Elizabethans in general saw no
reason to change this view.
  2 See L. Wann, 'The Oriental in Elizabethan Drama', MP, 12
                                                                    (I914-15), 423-47.
  3 Proof of the existence of this play and some conjectures about it are given in my article 'The
Lost Play of Mandeville', The Library,Fifth Series, 25 (1970), 46-9.
  4 See my article, p. 47, and The Worksof Thomas Nashe, edited by R. B. McKerrow, second
edition, revised by F. P. Wilson, 5 vols (Oxford, 1958), in, 198-9.
                                     C. W. R. D. MOSELEY                                         2I
 sensational. In accounting for the sudden drop in credence given to Mandeville
 about I60o which all critics have noted, we shall have to take its new avatarinto
 account. Here we have yet another 'edited' version to confuse the picture and to
 transmit knowledge of the Travels.Later, of course, we have the ballad and the
 chapbook.l
    We have seen so far that a highly sophisticated book was edited for widely
 divergent purposes, ranging from a practical man's guide to the Holy Land to a
 street-corner sermon; in between is the full gamut of romance, play, and ballad.
 Concurrent with all these new things, each dignified by the name of Mandeville's
 Travels,and each influencing the idea of the Travels,consciously or unconsciously,
 enjoyed by subsequent generations, is the production and dissemination of the
 standard versions, doubtless often, particularly later in our period, reaching the
 same reader. One may, in passing, remark that this dual existence is almost enough
 on its own to damn Mandeville's         Travelsas a scientific book by I6oo; it must have
 been hard to take the printed Travelsseriously when the play of the book was
 ranting on the boards, or when William Warner's bland fourteeners on Elenor's
 likeness to the Phoenix came trooping into consciousness.
John Mandeville,     F.R.S.
 In the seventeenth century, editions continued to abound: the usual frequent
 reprintings of the Defective text (often severely cut), the ballad, the chapbook.
 Other writers- Richard Head, for example2- continued to lift gobbets of material
 from the Travels. Sir John is at once Mercator's respectable author licet alioqui
fabulosus,and a cant term for a liar.3 The Baconian inductive method had revised
 permanently the co-ordinates of thought and the tests for truth and utility;
 the Royal Society, with its instructions for the guidance of travellers in collecting
 information,4 had, one would have thought, banished forever the fabulous Sir
John to the nursery in all well-ordered residences of the spirit. Yet Addison's
 generation was the first to value medieval books as medieval             books, the first to regard
 them not only scientifically, as informative of an earlier stage of society's develop-
 ment, but also as opening an area of the mind where the Man of Sense could find
 relaxation in the 'Enchanted Ground and Fairyland'5- an escape to a different
 world which eventually bore fruit in a revaluing of the importance and worth of
 imagination (as in Thomas Warton) and a revolution of taste that gave us Ivanhoe,
 'Strawberry Hill', and Christabel. all rights the Travels'career should be over:
                                          By
 classified for ever as a 'medieval' book after the publication of the Cotton text in
 1725 - the first scholars' edition, with a sensible introduction - and existing only
 as a chapbook for children.
    But in the latter half of the century a consortium of publishers thought it worth
 their while to dress Sir John up again. This, the last of the special editings we have
   1 See William London, Catalogueof the most Vendible   Books in England (London, I657), sig. A4V;
                             A
 V. E. Neuberg, Chapbooks: Bibliography    (London, I964), p. 40.
   2 See
          my article, 'Richard Head's The English Rogue: A "Modern Mandeville"?', rearbookof
English Studies,i (I971), 102-7.
   3 See, for example, Joseph Hall's Virgidemarium, Book iv, Satire vi, in Works,edited by P. Wynter
 (Oxford, 1863), pp. 648-9, and R. Brome's The Antipodes(1638); for the cant term, see Jonson,
 The Newe Inne, Act v, Scene 5.
   4 PhilosophicalTransactions the Royal Society,i (i665-6).
                              of
   5 Tatler, No. 254, 21-3 November 1710 (Steele, referring to Mandeville).
22                         The Metamorphoses Sir John Mandeville
                                                       of
to discuss, is useful as an indication of popular taste, showing how the work of the
scientists and the publication of the Cotton text had affected the presentation of
Mandeville'sTravelsto the public. The editor's methods of work are themselves
worth discussion: they show that the attitudes and criteria of the intelligentsia had
changed only the accidents, not the essence, of the popular mind. John Mandeville
may shelter under Jonas Hanway's umbrella; but it is recognizably the John
Mandeville that Warner knew, and that Bishop Hall and his like distrusted.
    The volume in which the version appears is a bibliographical problem of the
first order. It is a calf-bound duodecimo of 288 pages entitled A Compendium the                       of
 Travels of Mr Hanway, Sir John Mandeville, and Mr Lionel Wafer, and a Description
of Greenland, was sold in London by R. Dampier, J. Panton, T. Davidson,
                     and
W. Nixon, A. Manson, H. Newton, S. Darnton, and M. Oldham. The title-page is
undated, but the catalogue of Cambridge University Library suggests 'about 1770'
as its date of publication.1 The contents are the fourteenth century Travels,the
early seventeenth-century Descriptionof Greenland,                     the late seventeenth-century
Wafer,      and the eighteenth-century Hanway.
    The versions of Hanway's and Mandeville's books can be compared directly
with the then current texti recepti,            and by this comparison interesting insights are
obtained into the aims of the anonymous editor.2 Two men more different than
Hanway and Mandeville could hardly be imagined; yet the editor has brought
them together.3
   1 The bibliographical problems might briefly be stated here. The shelf-mark of the Cambridge
volume is XIX 65 I75, and its provenance is unknown. Josephine Waters Bennett (p. 359) referred
to a version of Mandeville (which she does not describe) on pages 202-45 of Volume IIIof what she
calls 'J. Smith, A Compendium the Most Approved
                                   of                    Modern Travels,ed. Hanway (Dublin, I757)'. So
far as I have been able to find out, no such book exists, and it seems as if Mrs Bennett has accidentally
conflated two references, one to the Cambridge volume, in which Mandeville does appear on pages
202-45,     and one to A Compendium the Most Approved
                                         of                   Modern Travels, printed for J. Scott, 4 vols
(London, 1757). Hanway's travels appear in Volume III, but Mr P. Henchy, Director of the National
Library of Ireland, who there inspected this book for me, tells me that there is no account of Mande-
ville's Travels in any of the four volumes. Despite exhaustive searches in the British Museum, the
help of Mr V. E. Neuberg, and the staff (particularly Mr Hancock) of the University Library in
Cambridge, I have been unable to find any trace of a J. Smith credited with such a volume or active
as a publisher in Dublin in the 1750s.
   Investigation of this problem drew closer attention to the Cambridge volume. In its present state
it is not part of a series: the title-page has no volume number. However, the title-page is a cancel
and its type, though close in style to the rest of the book, is not from the same punches; but
microscopic examination of the papers of title-page and text suggests that they are from the same
mill. It is possible that the volume is a reissue of old sheets, bought up by a 'remainders-man' with a
new title-page printed on blank paper bought at the same time as the sheets. Such frugality would
be beyond comment; since, however, no original can be found, this hypothesis is, on balance,
unlikely. The name Smith, however, and place (Dublin) in Mrs Bennett's reference indicate that
not all factors in this confused situation are yet clear: these names must come from somewhere.
There may yet be an archetype of the Cambridge volume. It would seem more likely that if so it is
a page-by-page reprint rather than a reissue. Nothing, however, can be stated with certainty.
(Besides those people mentioned above, I would like to thank Miss M. Pollard of the Department of
Older Printed Books and Special Collections at the Library of Trinity College, Dublin, and R. A.
Sayce, of Worcester College, Oxford, for help and useful advice in writing this note.)
   2 It is fair, I
                   think, to assume that the volume is the work of a single editor; the style is homogeneous
throughout.
   3 P. G. Adams, Travelers      and TravelLiars (Los Angeles, 1962), page 88, points out that after about
 1750 the summarizing, combining, rearranging, and rewriting of selected original books was common.
This volume is an example of this, J. Newbery's The WorldDisplay'danother. (The version of Hanway
given there is far closer to the original than this.) These collections were often unreliable, and
plundered each other without scruple.
                                       C. W. R. D. MOSELEY                                         23
    Jonas Hanway's HistoricalAccount the British TradeovertheCaspian (I have
                                                of                                        Sea
used the 1754 Dublin edition in two volumes) is a model of accurate and sensitive
description, with long and articulate accounts of peoples, religions, and customs.
The editor has extracted and rewritten sections from this; it is very heavily cut,
although still occupying 201 pages. The narrative is cast into the third person, and
the cutting is boorish and insensitive: all too often Hanway's complex accounts are
reduced to a mere catalogue, and the editor shows no feeling whatsoever for the
cadences of Hanway's prose.1 The main interest is mercantile, topographical, and
geographical; military and political information is considered important. The
narrative is not 'scientific', in the sense that the 'observer' is not as detached as the
Royal Society's instructions tried to make him, but their influence is discernible.
    The version of Mandeville on pages 202-45 shows similar treatment. Some things
are surprising. Some forty years after the publication of the Cotton text, the Vulgate
Latin text given by Hakluyt and excerpted by Purchas is used as the basis of the
version.2 Some reference may have been made to the Cotton text, for there seems
to be some attempt to imitate the style and idea of the editor's preface to the Cotton
text.3 The editor begins with a short character of Mandeville: 'Sir John was a
zealous Roman catholic, and therefore[my italics] we are not to wonder at his too
easy credulity in believing the fictitious miracles and holy absurdities of the lying
priests' (p. 203). Despite this patronizing disclaimer, with its assumption of
religious and intellectual superiority, the editor slips in two 'marvels' of Constan-
tinople (pp. 203-4) and then continues:
But it would be neither instructive nor entertaining to an English Protestant, to recite the
many Popish miracles and fraudulent impositions, with which the monks and friars deceive
their bigotted [sic] votaries, and which our author relates with a grave and serious solemnity
... Our travellers credit seems likewise not a little impaired, when he tells us, that in AEgypt
he had twice a sight of the Phoenix.
The point is that the editor is trying to have things both ways: he tries to suggest
the obligatory attitude of detached scepticism fashionable for travel books and to
imply contempt for his source, and yet this mask slips to reveal a delight in wonders
and marvels and a credulity totally of a piece with that of a Miinster or a Topsell.
A hack who would have been happy listening to stories in the House of Fame must
try to assume the tone of a Fellow of the Royal Society. From this point, the stories
   1                                                   John Newberyhad includeda precisof Hanway
     Hanway,had, of course,been editedelsewhere.
in TheWorld   Display'd (London,I759). I have usedthe 1779Dublineditionof Newberry:TheTravels
of MrJonasHanway,     Merchant, through Russia Persia;andback
                                               into               through                and
                                                                                Germany Holland,
                                                                          Russia,                   in
Volumes xIv, 125-40; xv, 1-82.) I have checked this version against the one in the Cambridge
volume: they differconsiderably, disagreeon mattersof fact - dates,for example,oftendo not
                                    and
tally. The Cambridgeversionis furtherfrom Hanway'sown book in this respectthan Newbery's,
a fact which points to extremecarelessness piracy,or both.
                                               or
   2 The editor refers to 'Hackluit' on page 22I; on pages 216 and 225 there are references to 'Oger'
the Dane, and the story,characteristic the continentalversions,is given of Prester
                                           of                                           John's having
been one of Ogier'sbarons.The storyof Mandeville's        death in Liege is repeated(p. 244). The date
given for Mandeville'sembarkation       is 1322 (as in Cotton), and his journeylasts thirty-threeyears
(like Cottonagain), ending (unlikeCotton,which has 1356)in 1355.Further,the editor'sassertion
that Mandevillesaw the Phoenix       twice (p. 204) is traceableto the Vulgate text (Hakluyt,Principall
Navigations, Skeltonand Quinn, p. 32); no early Englishtext claimsin so many wordsthat he
             ed.
saw it once.
   3
     Compare page v of the edition of the Cotton text and page 203 of the Cambridge volume,
quoted below.
 24                    The Metamorphoses Sir John Mandeville
                                                 of
 of the Ark, and of the Amazons are told quite seriously;' the marvels of the Aethio-
 pians, the river alternately hot and cold (pp. 208 ff.), the diamond's sexual
 reproduction (qualified only by 'says our author', p. 2Io), the eels twenty feet long
 in the Indus, the loadstone rocks (this story being severely cut) - all are told with
 no suggestion of editorial scepticism. The Fountain of Youth, at which point under-
 statement in Mandeville's early texts almost reaches irony, is mentioned; the only
 comment is 'Sir John ... imagined his health was the better for it ever afterwards'
 (p. 21I ). There is a complete acceptance of Mandeville's marvels as fact - the
 people who anoint themselves with the dung of the ox are condemned for this
 'foolish and filthy ceremony'; there is no question of its not existing at all. Indeed,
 the editor goes out of his way to include all Mandeville's marvels and strange
 customs, even, at times, conflating two or more into an extraordinary hybrid (for
example, on pages 2 3-I5)2 - as he says: 'Our traveller visited several islands in
 that part of the world, in which he saw many strange things; but we shall only take
notice of those that are most remarkable' (p. 218). We have gold-digging ants
 (pp. 237-8); polyandry and cannibalism, dogheaded men, fish swarming to land,
the sago palm - all are recorded as if no information on any of these had been
gathered since the fourteenth century. The editor is clearly not capable of sustaining
the pose of scholarly detachment; but he manfully reassumes it from time to time:
Whether Sir John saw these strange people with his own eyes, or whether he copied his
description from Pliny, he does not say; though the latter seems very probable, as the
account given by both is very much alike, and Hackluit seems to be of the same opinion.
                                                                                        (p. 221)
Similarly, he attempts a justification of marvels:
We have only taken notice of some of the most remarkable, lest we should be thought to
impose upon the credulity of our readers; and yet, if we look into the sixth and seventh
books of Pliny's natural history, we shall find as strange accounts of monstrous productions,
some the very same as here related, and a multitude of others altogether as incredible,
for which Pliny cites authorities whose credit he does not dispute. These prodigies he calls
the Mockeries of Men, and the works of ingenious nature, whose power is beyond our
conception. If then, an author of so established a reputation as Pliny, saw no reason to
question the truth of these miraculous operations of nature, we have as little reason to doubt
Sir John's veracity in the accounts he has given us of the same, or the like wonderful
productions.    (pp. 244-5)
This appeal to authority is a medieval rather than an eighteenth-century habit of
mind; Mandeville's far subtler discussion of the same problem which centres on
the properties of Nature and of God's multiplicity of purpose, is ignored completely.
The real drawback, however, is that the editor is inconsistent. He defends Mande-
ville by recourse to Pliny, yet he is always conscious of a possibly incredulous public
who will not accept auctoritas:
But as the reader will, perhaps, think he has had too much of the marvellous already, and
that the account we have already given, is too wonderful to be true, though the author
relates scarce anything but what he affirms he saw with his own eyes; we shall therefore
contract into a very narrow compass what he further writes upon these subjects. (p. 236)
   1 Robert Kerr'sis the more usual attitude: 'fictionsand absurdities, ridiculouseven for the
                                                                       too
credulity of children ... this worse than useless performance'(General    Collection Voyages
                                                                                   of         and
Travels, i8 vols (Edinburgh, I8I 1-24), I, 434).
   2 And also
              pages 241 ff., where the long finger-nailed Mandarin from the Travelsand also from
The FurtherAdventures RobinsonCrusoeis conflated with Mandeville's ideas of the Valley of the
                       of
Assassins.
                                     C. W. R. D. MOSELEY                                          25
His attempt to illuminate one of Mandeville's phenomena is frankly hilarious: the
Gravelly Sea, of constantly billowing sand and stones, he quotes in Mandeville's
'own words', and adds to his explanation 'he should have added, Because it is
continually agitated by strong winds' (p. 228).
    The inconsistency of attitude is paralleled by the careless editing. Conflations
have already been noted; the recasting into the third person slips into the first
person now and again (pp. 21 9-20, 22 I-2). Clearly the work is that of a hack, done
in haste. The most interesting conclusion to be drawn from this version is twofold:
a booksellers' consortium thought Mandeville in thisform a paying proposition as
late as I770; and, secondly, the editor, while carefully polishing his veneer of
eighteenth-century rational scepticism, is at root more credulous even than the
author of the book so long taken as the archetypal testament of the credulous lying
traveller.
    When we put our conclusions about the editing of Mandeville's               Travels  beside that
of Hanway, it is clear that the editor was interested only in 'fact' - the more
sensational the better. His critical judgement failed him; he was unable rigorously
to live up to his assumed standards of objective evaluation of phenomena, and can
make no distinction between the palace at Cronstadt, the trade of'Petersborough',
and the yearly production of gold-digging ants. His version has the faults of the
uninterpreted mass of facts and the sensational chapbook and the virtues of neither.1
Few books can have had so strange a career as the Travels. itself, it is a good book
                                                                       In
and an unusual one. Its translations are important landmarks in the redevelopment
of English prose. It had a great influence on the early explorers, and as I have
demonstrated elsewhere, it played some small part in the discovery of America.2
It was at no point in four hundred years without a considerable body of readers-
more than can be said for any Middle English author outside Chaucer and Langland.
But at the same time its reputation varied from respect to contempt; it called forth
both qualified praise - and the imitation that is the sincerest flattery - and fierce,
moralistic anger. Its author is a vague and shadowy figure. At no point has the
book's integrity, even, been respected; it has been recast at will into many forms.
This essay has attempted to look at some of them, and there are others. No general
conclusion can or perhaps should be drawn as yet; but clearly the metamorphoses
of Sir John Mandeville and his book run right through the development of our
literature, and in part illustrate the societies that produced it.
CAMBRIDGE                                                                 C. W. R. D. MOSELEY
  1 Precisely why so large a consortium of publishers chose to issue this heterogeneous collection is,
of course, hard to ascertain. It could be that public interest was running fairly high (at the time of
Cook's voyages north and south) in the east, and in the Americas (Lionel Wafer, whose account of his
crossing of the isthmus of Darien and his life among the Indians appears on pages 246-72, was
surgeon to Dampier's expedition in I691), and the publishers tried to take advantage of this. But
this supposition, of course, depends on the accuracy of the ascription of the volume to about 1770,
which is naturally hypothetical. Whatever the immediate occasion, it is clear that several people
thought that there was money in the project; the rarity of the book suggests that they were right.
   2 See
         Chapter Eight of my doctoral thesis.
NOTES

   1 The Travelsin England exists in four main forms, translated from the author's Anglo-Norman
fairly soon after the book was written: (I) The Defective Text (represented for example by BM MS
Harley 3954) which has a large lacuna in the account of Egypt. This is the version published by
Pynson and the only English version published in England until I725. It is considerably removed
from the author's holograph. A critical edition is in preparation by Dr M. C. Seymour; (ii) The
Vulgate Text: a Latin version showing considerable abbreviation and contamination which at some
point was connected with a group of texts handled by Jean d'Outremeuse, a Liege notary in the
late fourteenth century. The Vulgate has been contaminated with references to Ogier the Dane.
This text was published once in England by Hakluyt in the first edition of the PrincipallNavigations
(1589); (iii) The Cotton Text: exists uniquely in BM MS Cotton Titus C xvi, of the early fifteenth
century. The translation may be older. Though a nearly complete text, the translator was not
over-careful in his work, and has at times produced a very garbled version. Three folios are missing.
First published in 1725; critical editions by P. Hamelius, EETS, Ordinary Series, 153-4 (London,
 1919 and 1923) and M. C. Seymour (Oxford, I968); (iv) The Egerton text, again existing only
in one manuscript, BM MS Egerton I982. Egerton is a very accurate translation, complete, and
shows use of the French text behind the Defective. In many ways this is the preferred text. Edited
excellently by G. F. Warner, Roxburghe Club (London, 1889), and again (but translated into
Modern English) by M. Letts, Hakluyt Society, 2 vols (London, 1953). BM MS Harley 4383,
though incomplete, is in the opinion of many scholars the Anglo-Norman text nearest to the author's
holograph. The sources have been fully explored in the editions of Warner and Hamelius, and by
A. Bovenschen, 'Untersuchungen iiber Johann von Mandeville und die Quellen seiner Reisebes-
chreibung', Zeitschrift der Gesellschaftfur Erdkundezu Berlin, 23 (i888), 177-306, and critically
discussed by Josephine Waters Bennett, The Rediscovery Sir John Mandeville (New York, I954).
                                                          of
In what follows, references to Mandeville'sTravelsare to the Egerton and Cotton versions edited by
Letts and Seymour respectively.
